So let's look a bit
further in detail how this will complement each other and
complement LCA. LCA Is cradle to grave or
when we have a loop and a recycling cradle to cradle and
it's a global tool. And locally you will then use for
a new project as we were saying environmental impact assessment
which has really a local scope not trying to do
the supply chain is focusing on. Is the noise created by this company? Is the traffic created and
the pollution created due to this new installation exceeding the boundaries
that you can have in this region, okay? And now for the risk assessment we
relate impact per kilo of substance or for a certain usage of the substance
in a given environment. It focuses only on toxicity, whereas LCA as we said is related
to the product function and look at multiple impact in our case here. And again risk assessment will be
more local where LCA will be global regional and cover the entire supply chain
which risk assessment will usually not do. It will focus on the company
which is specifically a study. If we look at the substance and
material flow analysis, this time instead of being linked to
a function, it's for a given region and usually it's study one substance and
report everything in kilogram. Our colleague from SFA don't like
to go to impact because there is somewhat some uncertainty
in the impact assessment. But sometimes they sum up kilogram, they from my point of view should not and
keep the different flow separate. But LCA Is really impact and
damage oriented. Try to make things
comparable on an impact and damage basis on the DPSIR
on the impact side or equivalent impact at this level. So finally carbon and water footprint and
as we say it has the same scope. It's all related to the same product
function should go all to cradle to grave. So water footprint which doesn't go
cradle to grave is not compliant. But with focus and
that's what we call this area of concern. Either the climate change related problem,
global warming related or water related problems and so
we call that area of concern. LCA here look at a damage on
what we call area of protection, what we are trying to protect which is
more the receptor side of the problem. It's not linked to one type of problem but
more to who are, and what are the subject, and area which
are affected by the different impact. And this is human health, ecosystem
quality, natural resources which can be affected by several of the impact category
that we have on the left side, okay? So let's compare everything and
two things I would like to insist. So LCA Is studying a product or
a system and this is different from SFA which
look at the substance material EIA new localized activity
are an installation chemical and carbon, could be also a product but
also an individual company. Clearly what is really key is,
what type of question do you answer? Clearly a life cycle assessment is about
comparing it ask what is best, okay? Product A versus product B,
one part of the life cycle versus another. SFA MFA look at where
are the main sources or think in a region or
in the company where if I need to reduce this amount,
where should I reduce it? Or on the contrary, if I need this
material, where could I find it? This is really the type of
question that we are asking. The environmentalist impact assessment
is really about exceeding the local boundaries. So are we exceeding the different
boundary that we have here? Risk assessment is about safety, is it safe to carry out this
activity in this region? And carbon or water footprint
is really about what is best for this area of concern similar to SEA,
but this time for water related or carbon related problems. Are not going all detail but the basic
elements what is interesting is they are sometimes common to
this different tools. And in fact in LCA for
example, in the early 1990, we borrowed a lot from Risk assessment,
they were using multimedia model. Those respond assessments and we really borrowed them
quoting of course the work, and adapting here to be here comparative. We adapted risk assessment to be
comparative because we wanted to compare. Whereas to be safe here, usually risk
assessment tend to be conservative. They do conservative sense
assumption where in LCA, we use the same tool but
we want to be the best estimate, okay? Whereas in a risk assessment
we tend to be looking for conservative estimates that we have here. Different tools for different problems and it's important that you learn and
will practice through some exercises which tool will be adequate
appropriate for a given question. In summary, if we focus back to LCA. LCA is a mature ring method with well defined standards. L. C. A specificity. It's a quantified approach. It's from cradle to grave, cradle to cradle relates impact to
a function of a product it covers. Multiply impact. So it has a scope of encompassing
the anti problem because why? Because we want to analyze trade offs so we want to not to displace
a problem to another part. So we want to be able to analyze that. So we need to be comprehensive
in that case and has come an element and we can borrow and
have interaction with our colleagues from different communities and
learn from each other