      7        Conclusions and
               Key Points

7.1 KEY POINTS OF A LIFE CYCLE ASSESSMENT
Life cycle assessment (LCA) requires an iterative approach through various phases,
in which one first performs a preliminary evaluation of the system to determine the
order of magnitude of the different contributions, and then performs a more detailed
study of the important points previously highlighted. Each phase of an LCA has
major objectives and pitfalls to be avoided. The following paragraphs summarize the
key points of each phase (Figure 7.1) and highlight critical issues on which to focus
attention. Moreover, Appendix IV summarizes the forms to fill out for each LCA
phase, reminding the reader of the key points in each phase, as well as the informa-
tion that needs to be gathered and analyzed.

7.1.1 Goal and System Definition
Before performing or analyzing an LCA, it is important to consider the function of
the product or system. A poor definition of the function of the system can lead to the
comparison of alternatives that are not actually achieving the same function and thus
jeopardize the relevance of the study. To test the validity of the function definition,
one should ask the following questions:

      1. Does the primary function differ between scenarios? If so, the com-
         parison between scenarios does not make sense.
      2. Do the secondary functions differ between scenarios? If so, this is
         important to account for in the interpretation.


   Based on the product or system function, the comparative unit, or functional unit
(FU), must be carefully defined and be the same for all scenarios. This is the variable
that quantifies the system function of the system and to which all inventory flows
are related. The reference flows are the amounts of products and energy that need
to be directly purchased to achieve this FU; in other words, the first tier of required
processes and materials. The ratio of each reference flow to the FU can be used to
identify key environmental parameters that are critical to optimizing the system,
such as the lifetime and number of uses.
   Note that the FU is not a ratio. Moreover, the FU of a component of a com-
plex system (e.g., car door) generally refers to the function of the entire system (e.g.,
passenger protection over 1 person-mile). It is important to avoid confusing the FU


                                                                                     199
                General Principle (Ch. 2)    1. Goal and system definition (Ch. 3)                                         1c. System boundaries
                                                                                                                                                                             200

                It is recommended to carry 1a. System function                                                             System boundaries include all the necessary
                out the LCA in two steps:    The LCA assesses the environmental impacts associated with a product          processes to assure the desired function.
                • A first screening step     function. Products or systems can only be compared on the basis of a          • Rule 1: System boundaries must cover the
                  covers the whole LCA       similar function.                                                               same functional reality in all scenarios.
                  and assesses the order of                                                                                • Rule 2: A cut-off should be defined,
                  magnitude of emissions,    1b. Functional unit and reference flows                                         where processes should be excluded if
                  resource use, and impacts. • The functional unit is the common unit in all scenarios, quantifying the      they contribute less than the cut-off
                • A detailed analysis          function of the system. Emissions and extractions are calculated per          percentage (e.g., 1%).
                  improves the assessment      functional unit.                                                            • Rule 3: Processes that are identical in the
                  for the most important     • The reference flows differ for each scenario, representing the amounts of      different scenarios can only be excluded if
                  impacts.                     goods or services purchased to generate one functional unit.                   the reference and intermediary flows
                                             • Lifetime, number of uses, use phase efficiency, and other parameters           affected by these processes are strictly
                                               linking reference flows to functional unit can all be key parameters for       equal (i.e., total output of each system
                                                                environmental optimization.                                   must also be identical).
                2. Inventory (Ch. 4)
                                                                                 Goal and                                                4. Interpretation (Ch. 6)
                2a. Definition                                                                                                           Interpretation should be carried
                The inventory is the quantified elementary flows of               system
                                                                                                                                         out at all levels, looking at:
                matter, energy, and substances that cross the system             definition
                                                                                                                                         • The contribution of each life
                boundary, including pollutant emissions and                                                                                cycle stage and process, to
                extracted resources.                                            Inventory of                                               prioritize improvements that
                2b. Allocation                                                   extractions                        Interpretation         generate the largest impact at
                • Avoid allocation through process separation (if it is              and                                                   the lowest cost
                  possible to dissociate the different product systems)           emissions                                              • The contribution of each
                  or through system expansion (if it is possible to                                                                        substance
                  extend the system boundaries to include a proven                                                                       • Each phase of the life cycle
                  substituted product and avoided impacts).                       Impact                                                   assessment
                • Use physical allocation based on mass or energy               assessment                                               • Uncertainty to identify if
                   content only if there is a direct causality, or use                                                                     scenarios are significantly
                   marginal allocation when it is possible to marginally                                                                   different
                   vary the proportion between coproduct and product.
                                                                             3. Impact assessment (Ch. 5)
                • Use financial allocation based on market value as a
                                                                             The impact assessment quantifies the impact of each emission and extraction to enable
                   measure of the incentive for production.
                                                                              comparison of scenarios and the contributions of different life cycle stages and pollutants.
                • Use arbitrary assumption without causality only if
                                                                             • Impact assessment methods must at least incorporate the fate (transport, dilution, and
                  necessary.
                                                                               degradation) and effects (e.g., intrinsic toxicity) of emissions and extractions.
                2c. Input–Output                                             • More sophisticated methods accounting for spatial differentiation should be used when it
                The input–output approach deconstructs the functional          substantially reduces variability.
                unit into industrial spending to create the inventory.       • Several impact assessment methods should be used in parallel to test result robustness.
                                                                                                                                                                             Environmental Life Cycle Assessment




FIGURE 7.1 Summary of key concepts in life cycle assessment.
Conclusions and Key Points                                                          201


(the service) with the reference flow (what to buy). The following questions help
avoid this problem:

      3. Does the chosen FU represent the service offered (rather than an
         impact or consumption)?
      4. How are the material quantities, densities, or lifetimes taken into
         account to determine the reference flows?
      5. How are differences in the secondary function accounted for among
         scenarios?


   Continuing to stay centered on the system function, the system boundaries must
be defined based on function rather than geography. (Thus, a fast-food restaurant
cannot simply be compared to a family restaurant without accounting for the food
preparation of the fast food before it reaches the restaurant). Remember the three
rules of system delimitation defined in Section 3.5: (1) Do not forget about any
upstream processes needed to achieve the function; (2) use cut-off criteria and inclu-
sion of processes in a methodical and systematic manner; and (3) do not exclude pro-
cesses common to the different scenarios if their reference flows differ. Help yourself
follow these three rules by asking yourself the following questions:

      6. Do the system boundaries cover the same reality in all scenarios?
      7. What is the cut-off threshold percentage to exclude minor processes,
         and based on which inventory or intermediary flow (mass, inventory
         flow, impact)?
      8. Are certain production stages common to all scenarios? Do the quan-
         tities of the manufactured product or the reference or intermediary
         flows of common steps vary among scenarios? (If so, it is not possible
         to exclude the common steps.)
      9. Do any of the production steps or components indirectly affect the
         quantity of product used or lost? (For example, the type of packaging
         can affect amount of product losses. If so, the product itself must also
         been considered when assessing its packaging options.)



7.1.2 Inventory
Based on the processes and references flows included in the system boundary, the
next phase calculates the inventory of raw material extractions and substance emis-
sions associated with each FU. This is often based on existing databases of pro-
cesses, supplemented by first-hand product-specific data.
   When the product studied is associated with other coproducts, it is necessary
to allocate which emissions and extractions should be assigned to each of these
coproducts. Allocation should be avoided whenever possible, either by separating
out only the processes associated with the considered product or by expanding the
202                                            Environmental Life Cycle Assessment


system boundaries to count the avoided emissions due to substituting an existing
product with the coproduct. A poor choice of the substituted product, however, can
give totally false results; thus, it is important to consider the following questions:

      10. Is the substituted product actually replaced by the coproduct? (If not,
          it is not legitimate to apply this system expansion.)
      11. Can the coproduct be used to replace other substituted products? Which
          substituted product is the most unfavorable for the environment?


   When allocation cannot be avoided, physical, marginal, or financial allocations
are all methods of distributing the emissions among coproducts, listed in order of
preference. Each method should only be applied if a causal relationship can be estab-
lished for using that allocation method. For example, an allocation by mass (a type
of physical allocation) has no meaning if there is no physical reason for the emissions
to scale with mass. You thus want to ask yourself:

      12. Is there a causal underlying physical relationship between the physi-
          cal parameter (e.g., mass or volume) and emissions and amounts of
          raw materials used?


   Use marginal allocation when it is possible to marginally vary the proportion
between the coproduct and the product. The financial allocation applies in all other
cases and can always be tested as part of a sensitivity analysis.
   Whether or not allocation is used, it is important to characterize the quality of
available data to ensure the quality of the results provided by the study. For this, the
following quality indicators can be used: data reliability; data representativity; and
temporal, geographic, and technological correlations. You want to ask yourself:

      13. What is the quality of the data used in the inventory?
      14. To what extent are the data measured in situ?
      15. Do the unit processes correspond to the technology used?
      16. Are some of the data old or from other geographic areas? How does
          this affect the results?



7.1.3 Impact Assessment
Using the inventory of raw material extractions and substance emissions, the impact
assessment phase calculates the resulting impacts on humans and ecosystems. The
chosen impact assessment method should include information on the fate and effect
(e.g., transport, degradation, and toxicity). Because of the broad array of substances
and locations, current methods may only accurately predict impacts to within an
order of magnitude (which is still very useful in prioritizing actions, because impacts
Conclusions and Key Points                                                        203


can vary among substances by 12 orders of magnitude). It is thus important to apply
several methods of impact assessment to test the robustness of the conclusions. So,
be critical of the results and consider:

     17. Do the main conclusions change according to the impact assessment
         method used?
     18. What impact categories may be critical for the considered problem
         and how well do the selected impact methods address them?
     19. Are certain methods better suited to this study? And why?



7.1.4 Interpretation
Throughout the LCA phases, the results should be regularly interpreted, focus-
ing on the dominant pollutants of each life cycle stage that generate the greatest
impacts and on those stages that have the greatest potential for impact reduction.
Similarly, the uncertainties of the results must be considered in the context of the
analysis, along with the conditions of the study and any assumptions made. To
avoid common pitfalls in the interpretation phase, the following questions should
be asked:

    20. Have results been interpreted at each phase of the LCA (raw inven-
        tory, impact at midpoint level, and impact at damage level)?
    21. Which life cycle stage(s) and which pollutant(s) contribute most to the
        environmental impacts?
    22. Are the differences among scenarios significant? What is the signifi-
        cance criteria based on? What is the level of certainty of the major
        conclusions?
    23. What are the “key” parameters from an environmental perspective
        (based on sensitivity studies)?



7.2 LIMITATIONS OF AN LCA
There are many practical and conceptual limitations when conducting an LCA.
First, depending on the level of detail required and the availability of data, an
LCA can take time, especially during data collection. Moreover, especially if
not applying the rules of good practice, the results can be influenced by many
subjective factors, including the people conducting the LCA, and the choice of
assumptions or impact assessment method. This possible subjectivity could cast
doubt on the reliability and quality of the obtained information and thus call the
results into question. It is therefore necessary to adopt a critical approach and
to carefully check the assumptions and their consequences on the results of the
study. Particular care should be paid to the interpretation and communication
of the results. Finally, for certain substances in some impact categories, such as
204                                            Environmental Life Cycle Assessment


toxicity, the results only indicate orders of magnitude; these uncertainties should
be accounted for during interpretation by, for example, looking at and presenting
results on a logarithmic scale.
    An LCA consists of key underlying assumptions that limit its applicability. First
of all, the analysis generally only addresses adverse environmental effects, with-
out addressing the social and economic effects, which must be evaluated using
additional tools such as life cycle costing or social LCA. The spatial and temporal
dimensions are generally not differentiated, and results are often aggregated spa-
tially and temporally. The environment in which the system lies is assumed to be
uniform, with only the studied system being adapted. Moreover, the impacts are
considered to be additive, which means that the high scores of one category can be
compensated by lower scores in other categories depending on the weight assigned
to each category.
    To summarize, an LCA may not be appropriate in the following cases:

   • When only the social or economic dimension needs to be analyzed
   • When impacts are highly spatially variable or associated with differences
     in local or regional sensitivities
   • When major changes occur that deeply modify the studied system and
     involve nonlinear responses in the system
   • When systems other than the studied system change as well (such as changes
     in the economic structure or consumer behavior)
   • When aiming at checking whether toxicity limits have been exceeded

   Once the LCA suggests certain advantageous improvements or adjustments,
what are the real consequences of these choices? There are limitations in the abil-
ity to predict real-life consequences, because implementing an action designed
to reduce one kind of impact can cause other “collateral” impacts that can be
positive or negative. The LCA does not account for many potential consequences,
such as the risks to human health and the natural environment due to changes in
behaviors induced by the alternative; the risks to health caused by changes in avail-
able income; and the risks to health and environment due to structural changes or
innovations.
   The example of fluorescent light bulbs, as discussed in Section 3.3.3, illustrates
this concept of unintended consequences. Fluorescent light bulbs pollute less and are
cheaper than incandescent light bulbs when compared over the entire life cycle. What
are the consequences of these financial savings to consumers? They may decide to
install more bulbs in less well-lit areas or they may be less attentive in turning off
the light when leaving a room. They can use the money saved to purchase other con-
sumer goods. In such a case, the actual environmental improvement would be lower
than that foreseen by the LCA. Two scenarios that do not generate the same costs
can therefore lead to different indirect impacts, which are not accounted for in an
LCA. It is thus important to identify these potential indirect effects and, if relevant,
complement functional-based recommendations with qualitative consumption-based
recommendations on overall effects when communicating LCA results (as discussed
in Section 6.8.4).
Conclusions and Key Points                                                            205


7.3 POTENTIAL APPLICATIONS OF AN LCA
7.3.1 Overview of LCA Publications
LCAs have been applied for multiple purposes and to multiple products. Figure 7.2
depicts how LCAs have been applied as a word cloud, in which the size of each word
scales with how frequently it appeared in the title of any publication containing the
words “life cycle assessment” in its title.
    Figure 7.2 indicates how and why LCAs are being applied and studied, at least
for publication purposes. LCAs are often used to “compare” the “impacts,” “energy,”
and “emissions” associated with “production” “systems,” “integrating” over the entire
lifetime of the product.
    LCA publications still have a strong methodological emphasis, frequently mention-
ing “methodology,” “sustainability,” “evaluation,” and “management.” Many address
the “carbon” “footprint” and “greenhouse” “gas” (“GHG”) emissions as part of the
most common mention of “impacts”.
    The impacts in LCA are considered from a “production” or product-oriented per-
spective in contrast to, for example, risk assessment, which is receptor-oriented. The
“design” stage of a product is thus also a prominent application type.
    The most prominent application domain is clearly “energy,” with additional related
terms such as “electricity,” “fuels,” “power,” and “solar.” A second application domain
is associated with “buildings” and “materials,” including “construction.” Other impor-
tant domains are “technology,” “waste” and “recycling,” and “water.” Agriculture and
forestry applications are also represented by multiple words such as “food,” “plants,”
“biomass,” “crops,” “wood,” “biodiesel,” “biofuel,” and “bioethanol.” “Transportation”
and “vehicle” are present but not in a prominent way.




FIGURE 7.2 Most common words in the title of the 7920 papers in the Scopus database
with “LCA” and “life cycle assessment” in their title (search conducted March 20, 2015).
The title of each paper was pasted into Wordle, which then created this word cloud based on
frequency of occurrence of each word. The words “LCA,” “life cycle assessment,” “environ-
mental,” “case study,” and other commonly used English words were excluded; synonyms
were grouped (e.g., “impacts”/“impact,” “compare”/“comparing”).
206                                             Environmental Life Cycle Assessment


   Finally, the most frequently mentioned global region is China (166 citations),
followed by Europe (96) and Brazil (68), which may indicate an interesting shift
from the traditional use of LCA in developed countries toward emerging countries.
   We now discuss some of these application domains in more detail.

7.3.2 Application to Ecodesign
LCA has many potential applications due to the large amount of information
obtained. These applications can be in the context of company management or in
the public domain.
    LCA provides valuable information for the evaluation and improvement of a
product, identifying critical points where the environmental performance of a prod-
uct can be improved. LCA can thus be used to help define certain principles of
ecodesign (design of environmentally friendly products). The first principle is that it
is necessary to dematerialize, and work in terms of services rather than products. For
example, a store where you can print and make copies does not sell photocopiers, but
only rents use of the copier to make the copies. To be successful, the designer must
therefore build devices that are more reliable.
    The second ecodesign principle stemming from life cycle thinking is the impor-
tance of reducing manufacturing impacts by minimizing the amount of material
used for a given product function, removing toxic substances used in manufacturing,
and minimizing production waste and the diversity of materials used to facilitate
recycling.
    The third principle focuses on the use stage, aiming to reduce energy consump-
tion and the product weight for all processes where transport is important, and to
minimize the waste during the use stage.
    Finally, the last set of ecodesign principles addresses the end of life, including the
importance of using recycled materials and an easily dismantled product to make the
product recyclable, especially when the production of toxic materials and waste is
important. We must also try to extend the life of the product, especially if the impact
of the production stage is greater than that of the use stage. However, if the studied
product is continually developing to reduce impacts over an otherwise dominant use
stage, a longer lifetime is not recommended. For example, driving an old car without
a catalytic converter produces more emissions than producing and driving a new car.
    One problem in using LCA for ecodesign is that it may come too late in the design
process of a product, thus limiting the flexibility. We recommend applying the tool as
soon as possible in the development of a new product, even if only partially, or utiliz-
ing results obtained and lessons learned from a previous similar product.

7.3.3 Application to Product Comparisons
LCA enables the comparison of existing products and services within a company or
between competitors, providing information that can be used to select a particular
product or service. A comparative study can also provide ideas for improving pro-
duction and design processes of products. This is currently one of the most common
uses of LCA.
Conclusions and Key Points                                                         207


7.3.4 Application to Long-Term Decision-Making
LCA also applies in the context of strategic planning, and more globally at the
environmental management and decision-making levels, whether in a company or
in a government or nongovernmental agency. Companies define and utilize long-
term environmental strategies for various reasons. First, a company may realize that
environmental improvements following “end-of-pipe” approaches are significantly
more expensive, since, for example, it is often more costly to treat waste and solve
toxicity problems at the end of a pipe rather than simply avoid or minimize this
waste in the production and use of the product. It is then advantageous to make
radical changes in the life cycle of products, and LCA effectively helps to identify
bottlenecks in production, possible alternative production processes, and best pos-
sible design opportunities.
   Secondly, an organization that anticipates future legislation or changes in public
perception can use LCA results to plan better and more flexible production strategies
and technologies. This reduces the long-term risk of losing customers or business
based on environmentally sensitive consumers or legislation. LCA results allow a
company or administration to account for the environmental performance of their
processes and products when choosing its partners (suppliers, subcontractors, etc.).
Indeed, suppliers used to generally be selected based only on the cost and perfor-
mance of their product. Now, customers are increasingly demanding that companies
comply with quality standards and environmental criteria, which implies taking into
account environmental aspects when choosing suppliers. For governments, LCA can
be used to define priorities regarding environment and energy development, and to
generally help guide environmental policies.
   Finally, LCA can contribute to the development of standards. In fact, LCA is the
mandatory basis for the environmental declaration of products and the definition of
ecolabel criteria. LCA also has potential in legislation, public information, advertis-
ing, and marketing.


7.3.5 Application to Different Types of Products
LCAs are applied to a variety of systems and products (Figure 7.2, Table 7.1), with
some of the main domains in packaging, motor vehicles/transport, construction, syn-
thetic materials, and energy (Frankl and Rubik 2000). Note that the emphasis on
packaging and transport found by Frankl and Rubik in 2000 does not show up in
the 2015 literature survey (Figure 7.2), showing a shift toward energy, building, and
waste (see Section 7.3.1).


7.3.6 LCA: A Tool for Life Cycle Thinking
Life cycle assessment is part of the larger framework of life cycle thinking, which
generalizes LCA results with the goal of linking technology and sustainable devel-
opment. It includes other concepts, such as industrial ecology (where wastes from
one process are used as raw materials for another), risk analysis, ecolabels (environ-
mental labels), environmental management systems, ecodesign (creation of a more
208                                                 Environmental Life Cycle Assessment



             TABLE 7.1
             Life Cycle Assessment by Type of Product
                                                Absolute Number        % of Total
             Motor vehicles/transport                   95                 15
             Synthetic materials                        61                 10
             Packaging                                 103                 17
             Hygiene/cleaning                           28                  5
             Construction/building materials            78                 13
             Food                                       26                  4
             Energy                                     52                  8
             Paper/printing                             21                  3
             Electronic equipment                       31                  5
             Waste                                      33                  5
             Metals                                     11                  2
             Furniture                                   8                  1
             Textiles                                    6                  1
             Other                                      39                  6
             Unknown                                    29                  5
             Total                                     621                100

             Source: Frankl, P. and Rubik, F., Life Cycle Assessment in Industry and
                       Business: Adoption Patterns, Applications and Implications,
                       Springer, Germany, 2000. With permission.
             Note: Study based on all LCAs performed until 1996 in Switzerland,
                    Italy, and Sweden.




environmentally friendly product), and life cycle management. Currently, life cycle
thinking is being developed within the methodological framework of the Life Cycle
Initiative (Section 1.3).

7.3.7 Example of Life Cycle Management of a Company
Life cycle management, one aspect of life cycle thinking, aims to integrate environ-
mental aspects into industrial processes by considering the impacts and costs of the
supply chain. It seeks to increase the competitiveness of new and existing products,
by examining the strengths and weaknesses of a product within its market, combined
with the environmental and social aspects throughout its life cycle. Thus, life cycle
management can be seen as a way to improve the environmental performance of a
company within its temporal and financial constraints.
    An example of a life cycle management tool is Quantis Suite 2.0 (see website
listed in Appendix I), which applies the principles of a product LCA to the whole
company, taking into account the supply and user chain. This tool is developed by
Quantis, an environmental consulting spin-off from the Swiss Federal Institute of
Technology, Lausanne (EPFL).
Conclusions and Key Points                                                                209


    The Quantis software quantifies the carbon footprint and environmental
performance of a company, accounting for both direct and indirect impacts as
required by the international ISO 14000 standard. The impacts of the production
site are evaluated and compared with those of the supply chain, use stage, and dis-
posal. The software compares this environmental analysis to a cost analysis to iden-
tify improvement opportunities that offer the highest benefits at the lowest costs. It
includes an analysis of legal compliance to quickly position the company within its
legal environment without getting lost in increasingly complex legislation.
    The user enters basic company data related to its products and activities. Data
can be entered geographically by production site, production unit, or type of prod-
uct. Results are presented as tables summarizing the primary energy consumption,
equivalent CO2 emissions, and emissions of important pollutants at a variety of lev-
els for the product or factory, including the supply chain, company or production site,
and waste disposal chain (Figure 7.3). Inventory results, which can also be provided
in detail for each step, are then used in a second module to calculate impact. Finally,
the costs are considered and combined with the impacts calculated in the first two

               Upstream                      Direct                   Downstream

                Upstream              Direct emissions        Product disposal and
                emissions              on factory site         recycling emissions
 Factory




             Suppliers for                  Factory                    Disposal of
           factory processes               processes                  factory waste




             Consumption of               Consumption of              Consumption of
             natural resources            natural resources           natural resources

               Upstream              Direct emissions         Product disposal and
               emissions             from usage phase          recycling emissions
 Product




             Suppliers for                Product use                  Disposal of
           product use phase                 phase                      product




             Consumption of               Consumption of              Consumption of
             natural resources            natural resources           natural resources


FIGURE 7.3 Life cycle stages considered in Quantis software for life cycle management.
(From Della Croce, F. et al., Company-LCA: an innovative analytical tool for the quantifica-
tion of companies environmental performances, internal report EPFL-GECOS, 2005. With
permission.)
210                                           Environmental Life Cycle Assessment


modules to calculate the economic benefit derived from a marginal reduction of
impact for each step of the life cycle and each process of the company. This helps to
identify action priorities that account for both financial and environmental aspects.
One of the advantages of this approach is to offer to a broad array of companies
the opportunity to evaluate their performance over the course of the life cycle and
account for their specific structures without having to hire internal LCA specialists.

EXERCISES
Exercise 7.1: Critical Analysis of an LCA Case Study
Select an LCA case study paper and analyze it from a critical point of view, using
Figure 7.1 and the key questions boxed in this chapter to look for biased, missing,
and well-studied elements in the goal definition, inventory, impact assessment, and
interpretation.
   Search by keyword “LCA case study” in a literature search engine or use the arti-
cle by Humbert et al. (2009), presenting the comparison of two packaging materials.
