      9        Metacomparison
               of the Life Cycle
               Environmental Impacts
               of Bio-Based Products
               Gregory Houillon, Josef Kaenzig, Jinglan Hong,
               Andrew Henderson, and Olivier Jolliet

One can produce a large variety of products from biomass, including energy (heat
and power), biofuels, chemicals, lubricants, surfactants, solvents, and biopolymers.
Often, expected environmental benefits can induce a designer, manufacturer, or
industry to switch from a conventional, petrochemical-based product to one derived
from biomass. While use of bioproducts often leads to important environmental ben-
efits, there is the potential for negative repercussions, and this balance needs to be
better understood. This chapter illustrates the systematic use of life cycle assessment
(LCA) for meta-analysis, reviewing the LCA state of the art for a wide range of bio-
based products. Such metastudies are usually commissioned by agencies or sponsors
that are primarily interested in obtaining a broad overview of the field, rather than
detailed results for a single product.

9.1 INTRODUCTION
Bio-based raw materials (e.g., agricultural and forest resources) and products derived
from them (e.g., biofuels) have received attention of late as potentially environmen-
tally friendly substances, due to their renewable nature and their ability to substi-
tute for fossil fuels in various applications (Perez-Garcia et al. 2005; Malça and
Freire 2006; Gabrielle and Gagnaire 2008; Kim and Dale 2008; Schmehl et al.
2008). Indeed, unlike the case of their fossil-based counterparts, the materials and
renewable energies produced from biomass (agriculture, silviculture) can potentially
reduce energy consumption and greenhouse gas emissions, and lessen deleterious
impacts on air, water, and soil (e.g., Perez-Garcia et al. 2005; Kim and Dale 2008).
It is commonly hoped that their use would preserve fossil resources while promoting
the adoption of sustainable agricultural practices (Clift 2007; Goldemberg 2007).
However, bio-based products can also generate additional environmental impacts
that can vary widely from one supply chain to another. Therefore, environmental



                                                                                   243
244                                            Environmental Life Cycle Assessment


assessments that quantify these impacts must be conducted to identify the most
promising alternatives.
    Quantitative analytical tools such as LCA contribute to such assessments, helping
to replace preconceived ideas with data-driven findings. One of the challenges and
limitations of LCA is to create meaningful comparisons across products and studies,
because of variability of assessments, even with the International Organization for
Standardization (ISO) framework.
    The environmental impact of some classes of bio-based products has been exten-
sively studied using LCA methods, showing important variation depending on the
product and the study. Though individual analyses may show positive results—for
example, for polylactic acid-based products (Vink et al. 2003, 2004)—broader
reviews have not proved a systematic advantage with respect to reduced emissions
and energy consumption (Meyer-Aurich et al. 2008). Patel et al. (2005) reviewed
bio-based polymers and natural fibers, evaluating the available LCA studies using
comparisons based on weight and functional unit (FU). Quirin et al. (2004) and
Von Blottnitz and Curran (2007) reviewed the environmental impacts of bioethanol,
which is made from varying feedstocks for use as a transportation fuel, in com-
parison with conventional fuels. However, these reviews usually focus on a single
application of biomass and do not allow for comparison across different uses of
biomass. Since bio-based material resources are also limited by available land areas,
it is of great interest to compare application, identify tendencies, and provide recom-
mendations that may lead to efficient use of biomass. The present chapter therefore
addresses the following challenges, aiming at

   • The qualitative and quantitative analysis of the environmental impact of a
     wide range of bio-based products, based on a meta-analysis of LCA studies
   • The development of a method to compare nonrenewable energy consump-
     tion and greenhouse gas emissions, as well as eutrophication and acidifica-
     tion across various biomass supply chains
   • The application of the method to 10 nonfood plant supply chains, helping
     identify general tendencies in environmental performance
   • The identification of key parameters, strengths, and limitations of the LCA
     approach applied to this field

    To address these needs, a meta-analysis was carried out to improve the evalu-
ation of possible environmental gains resulting from switching to plant resource
supply chains. This work was adapted from a study initially carried out for the
French National Agency for Environmental and Energy Management (Houillon
et al. 2004a, 2004b) that reviewed the state of the art in LCA of bio-based products,
updating it and extending it to a second stage to additional studies on bioethanol
and biodiesel. Rather than presenting data on each supply chain, a comprehensive,
quantitative, qualitative, and critical inventory of all available data was created
and used to select the most appropriate studies for detailed analysis. Second, we
present a unique approach to compare both the absolute and relative gains offered
by 10 categories of bioproduct applications (agrimaterials, bioethanol, biodiesel, and
agricultural biomass for energy production, biopolymers, surfactants, lubricants and
Metacomparison of Bio-Based Products                                                     245


hydraulic fluids, solvents and intermediate chemical products) compared with their
fossil counterpart. The metastudy specifically compares the nonrenewable primary
energy use and environmental impacts (greenhouse gas emissions, acidification, and
eutrophication) of various uses of biomass. Finally, we give recommendations for the
development of biomass resource supply chains and suggest avenues for improving
LCA knowledge.

9.2 METHODS: META-ANALYSIS OF LCA STUDIES
9.2.1 Overview of LCA Studies
The following approach was developed to compare the results of available LCA stud-
ies on bio-based products. Based on criteria including completeness, system bound-
aries, data consistency, year of publication, and ISO 14044 compliance, a number of
LCA studies on 10 nonfood plant supply chains (agrimaterials, bioethanol, biodiesel,
and agricultural biomass for energy production, biopolymers, surfactants, lubricants
and hydraulic fluids, solvents and intermediate chemical products) were selected for
detailed analysis for the different product applications. The meta-analysis was car-
ried out as a stepwise procedure (Table 9.1). Based on a large number of more than
900 LCA references, a first subset of LCA studies was collected. A critical analysis
was carried out on these collected studies and only the most relevant in each sec-
tor were selected, leading to a limited number of studies of high interest that were
analyzed in further detail (see Table 9.1 and CRC Press website, Meta compari-
son). The supply chains were divided into two groups (Group 1 = more commonly
studied areas; Group 2 = less-studied areas) based on the number of LCA studies.
The number of available LCA studies varied strongly from one field of application
to another. In general, there are many LCA studies on biofuels, energy crops, and
timber that have been performed according the ISO 14044 norms. However, fewer



   TABLE 9.1
   Summary of Biomass Supply Chains and LCA Studies Analyzed
                                            LCA References   LCA Studies   LCA Studies
   Group        Bio-Based Product             Collected       Collected     Analyzed
   1        Agrimaterials (fiber/wood)          36/132          17/82          5/7
   1        Ether alcohols (bioethanol)          216             148           12
   1        Ester oils (biodiesel)               203             127           10
   1        Forest biomass                       114              75            8
   2        Agricultural biomass                  76              55            5
   2        Biopolymers                           40              27            9
   2        Surfactants                           26              13            6
   2        Hydraulic oils and lubricants         27              11            4
   2        Solvents                               9               6            3
   2        Chemicals and other                   11               7            2
             intermediate products
246                                             Environmental Life Cycle Assessment


studies have been carried out on chemical bioproducts and biomaterials following
the ISO standards.

9.2.2 Analysis of Quality and Selection of Studies Analyzed in Detail
These selected studies were then systematically evaluated according to a set of
specific criteria: range of scenarios, reliability of studies, technological sensitivity,
geographic sensitivity, consistency of results, and additional needs. A qualitative
indication of the literature available for the 10 biomass supply chains is shown in
Figure 9.1. These criteria are briefly discussed in the following paragraphs.
    The diversity of scenarios shows a trend according to the end point for biomass;
there is a wider range of scenarios represented in the literature for those applications
with a solid product (e.g., fiber and wood), while those applications with a liquid
end product (e.g., surfactants) have a lower diversity of scenarios represented in the
literature. The available literature contains relatively few studies that are compli-
ant with ISO standards, except in the case of agrimaterials (particularly solid wood
materials), biofuels, and forest biomass (bioenergy; heat and electricity). As a result,
many LCA results have not been subject to external review, particularly in the case
of biopolymers, surfactants, hydraulic oils and lubricants, solvents, and chemical and
other intermediates.
    In terms of technological development, many biomass supply chains are still in
the prototype stages; in contrast, conventional fossil fuel supply chains have been in
development for decades. Therefore, the continued development and optimization
of biomass supply chains will likely result in higher efficiency and improve their
environmental performance, resulting in medium to high sensitivity to technologi-
cal developments (Figure 9.1). Unlike the technological sensitivity, the geographic
sensitivity is largely moderate for plant supply chains as a whole. Geographic effects
are most notable in the agricultural production stage, due to climatic differences, and
are more rarely seen in the conversion and processing stages.
    The consistency of results is highly variable, depending on the supply chain and
impact categories. The variations observed are due to the following: differences in
LCA methodology among the various studies (boundaries of the system studied,
methods of impact assessment, etc.), uncertainties (related to specific pollutant emis-
sions data, knowledge of the agricultural production stage, and biomass conversion
processes), and technological knowledge of the supply chains. The exception to the
latter is in the case of surfactants, for which technological knowledge is satisfactory,
but LCA knowledge is limited. Finally, additional data needs have been identified.
These fall broadly into the following categories of difficulty in characterizing sup-
ply chains (e.g., changing supply chains and processes) and lack of complete LCA
studies (e.g., failure to take all impact categories into account, problems with the
selection of appropriate FUs, and failure to take the complete life cycle into account).

9.2.3 Quantitative Comparison of Various Supply Chains across Studies
The comparison of biomass supply chains requires a new methodology. The objec-
tive is not to provide typical, specific values for each chain (the state of current
                                                        Diversity of        Reliability of       Technological           Geographic        Consistency of   Additional
                                                         scenarios            studies              sensitivity           sensitivity          results         needs
                                  Agrimaterials
                                (fiber and wood)                4           2                           4                   3              2                      4
                                 Ether alchohols
                                   (bioethanol)         2                        3                          5               3                       4             4
                                     Ester oils




                     Group 1
                                    (biodiesel)         2                        3                      4                   3                       4             4

                                 Forest biomass                 4                3                      4                   3                       4             4
                                  Agricultural
                                   biomass                          5   1                                   5                   4          2                          5
                                                                                                                                                                          Metacomparison of Bio-Based Products




                                  Biopolymers                       5            3                          5        2                              4         3

                                   Surfactants      1                            3                      4                   3                   3                 4
                                 Hydraulic oils




                     Group 2
                                 and lubricants             3               2                               5               3              2                      4

                                    Solvents            2                   2                           4                   3              2                      4
                               Chemical and other
                                                                    5   1                    ?                   ?                     ?                              5
                                 intermediates


FIGURE 9.1 Summary of criteria applied to LCA references (1 = very weak, 3 = medium, 5 = very strong). (Adapted from Houillon, G. et al., Bilan
environnemental des filières végétales pour la chimie, les matériaux et l’énergie. Etat des connaissances: Analyse cycle de vie (ACV), Synthèse pub-
lique, Paris, ADEME. Available from www.ademe.fr/partenaires/agrice/publications/documents_francais/ACV_Synthese.pdf. 2004a).
                                                                                                                                                                          247
248                                                          Environmental Life Cycle Assessment


knowledge does not always allow for this), but to reveal certain trends based on
available LCA studies. The nonrenewable primary energy consumption and envi-
ronmental impacts of bio-based products may be compared with conventional,
petrochemical-based products on three levels. One metric is per kilogram of prod-
uct, but this is possible only if the mass per FU is the same, which is rarely the
case. Secondly, products with the same functional unit can be compared in a classic
LCA, that is, per functional unit. Such a comparison provides an analysis of gains or
emission reduction per functional unit, identifying supply chains and products that
require less energy for product manufacture.
   However, in a meta-analysis, functions between compared products differ widely
when comparing across the various uses of products; furthermore, energy gain or
reduction in emissions per functional unit cannot be directly compared between
different biomass supply chains. Therefore, a new approach is needed to bring all
biomass uses to a similar comparative metric valid across different supply chains.
We propose two metrics, an absolute (A) and a relative (B), which are presented in
the following subsection (Houillon et al. 2004).

9.2.3.1 (A) Absolute Gain per Hectare of Cultivated Land
First, if the use of available agricultural area is considered, a comparison of absolute
gains per hectare of cultivated land is carried out, while taking into account that the
biomass is replacing a reference fossil product with a consistent functional unit (e.g., bio-
fuels produced on all available farmland in France could not replace all the fossil fuels
used in that country). This absolute comparison pertains to the use of biomass in terms
of agricultural production, addressing the question of what kind of biomass and which
products make best use of the limited area available for agriculture and lead to the
highest environmental benefits, as compared with conventional products. Equation 9.1
represents this metric, namely the gain (or reduction) in impact per biocultivated hectare
and year for a given study (Gper ha biocultivated-year [in e.g., MJ/ha-year]):

                                      (  per FU
          G per biocultivated ha-year = Sconventional           per FU
                                                                         )    per biocultivated ha-year
                                                      fossil − Sbio-based × N FU                          (9.1)

where:
   per FU
  Sconventional  fossil (MJ/FU) indicates the total impact per FU of the considered study
          for the conventional fossil scenario of reference
   per FU
  Sbio-based  (MJ/FU) indicates the total impact per functional unit of the bio-based
          scenario
    per biocultivated ha-year
  N FU                        (FU/ha-year) is the annual production of functional units per
          cultivated hectare in the bio-based scenario

   The studied impacts are the nonrenewable primary energy (in MJ) as well as the
global warming impact (in kgCO2-eq), the eutrophication impacts (in kgPO4-eq), and the
acidification impacts (kgSO2-eq).
   A similar metric was also developed independently and used by Dornburg et al.
(2004), comparing the land requirements, energy savings, and reduction in green-
house gas emissions of bio-based polymers and bioenergy.
Metacomparison of Bio-Based Products                                                               249


9.2.3.2 (B) Gain Relative to the Substituted Part
A more classical metric is to calculate the relative gain due to the bio-based product,
relative to the conventional product. However, care must be taken when comparing
in a consistent way products that are entirely substituted by the bio-based product
and those in which only a part is substituted. In the case where only a part of the total
product is substituted, we only divide by the part of the conventional product that is
substituted by the biomass, as shown in Equation 9.2.


                           G% =
                                   (S per FU
                                      conventional fossil
                                                               per FU
                                                            − Sbio-based   ) × 100%
                                        (S  subsituted part per FU
                                            conventional fossil      )                            (9.2)


                                       subsituted part per FU    per FU                 per FU
In Equation 9.2, the denominator Sconventional      fossil    = Sconventional fossil − Scommon parts (in
e.g., MJ/FU) is the impact score per functional unit associated only with the part of
the conventional fossil product that is substituted by the biofuels. For example, if a
bio-based circuit board is to be compared with a conventional circuit board, the non-
board components (chips, transistors, solder, etc.) that are common to the fossil and
the biofuel scenarios must not be included in the denominator. These common parts
can be kept in the numerator of both the total fossil and the total bio-based scenario,
since these cancel when calculating the difference.


9.3 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
9.3.1 Comparison of the Environmental Impacts of Bio-Based Products
9.3.1.1 Comparison across the 10 Categories of Bio-Based Products
Figures 9.2 and 9.3 show comparisons of the environmental benefits for 10 bio-based
products categories using the two metrics discussed in the previous subsection: (A)
Figure 9.2 per hectare-year of land cultivated and (B) Figure 9.3 for relative environ-
mental efficiency per FU. The CRC Press website provides the detailed references
and data used. Data are presented as modified boxplots. Minimum and maximum
values for each category are represented by horizontal bars connected to the main
box body by vertical lines. The main box body indicates the twenty-fifth and sev-
enty-fifth percentiles of the data, and the middle line indicates the median value, to
look at general tendencies. In cases of product categories with few data points, some
of these statistical descriptors may be nonexistent. Since the data are not necessar-
ily a representative sample of any of the considered product categories, and because
each application leads to individually potentially valid results, it is important to also
account for the full ranges of variation in the interpretation.
    For energy consumption and global warming (panels a and b of Figures 9.2
and 9.3), almost all of the bioproduct LCAs show significant benefits over conven-
tional fossil products (positive gains). However, eutrophication impacts (Figures 9.2c
and 9.3c) are often increased due to emissions, mainly of phosphate or nitrogen
applied as fertilizer, during the agricultural production stage of the bioproduct. As
far as acidification impacts (Figures 9.2d and 9.3d) are concerned, reported data on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            250


                                                 800                                                                                                                                                                         40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             30
                                                 600                                                                                                                                                                         20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             10
                                                 400
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            −10
                                                 200
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            −20




              Primary energy (GJ/ha-year)
                                                   0                                                                                                                                                                        −30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            −40




                                                                                                                                                                                 Global warming potential (tCO2e/ha-year)
                                                −200

                                                                                                                                                                                                                            200
                                                   0

                                                −10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            150
                                                −20

                                                −30                                                                                                                                                                         100

                                                −40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             50
                                                −50




                                                                                                                                                                                 Acidification (kgSO2e/ha-year)
                                                −60                                                                                                                                                                           0




              Eutrophication (kgPO4e/ha-year)
                                                −70




                                                                                                                                                                         Other
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Other




                                                                                                                                                              Solvents
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Solvents




                                                       Agrimat.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Agrimat.




                                                                                                                       Biodiesel
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Biodiesel




                                                                  Biopolym.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Biopolym.




                                                                                                                                   Lubricants
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Lubricants




                                                                              Agr. Biom.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Agr. Biom.




                                                                                                          Bioethanol
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Bioethanol




                                                                                                                                                Surfactants
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Surfactants




                                                                                           Forest Biom.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Forest Biom.




FIGURE 9.2 Advantages and limitations of comparison metrics between plant resource supply chains and their reference fossil resource counterparts.
Environmental gain per hectare and year (metric A) due to the use of bio-based products compared with conventional products for (a) nonrenewable
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Environmental Life Cycle Assessment




primary energy, (b) global warming, (c) eutrophication, (d) acidification impact changes.
                                                         100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  120
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  100
                                                          80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   80
                                                          60                                                                                                                                                                       60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   40
                                                          40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0
                                                          20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  −20




               Relative primary energy efficiency (%)
                                                                                                                                                                                         Relative global warming efficiency (%)
                                                           0                                                                                                                                                                      −40


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  100
                                                           0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Metacomparison of Bio-Based Products




                                                        −500
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0
                                                −1000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  −50
                                                −1500
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          −100
                                                −2000



                                                                                                                                                                                         Relative acidification efficiency (%)




               Relative eutrophication efficiency (%)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          −150




                                                                                                                                                                                 Other
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Other




                                                                                                                                                                      Solvents
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Solvents




                                                               Agrimat.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Agrimat.




                                                                                                                               Biodiesel
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Biodiesel




                                                                          Biopolym.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Biopolym.




                                                                                      Agr. Biom.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Agr. Biom.




                                                                                                                                           Lubricants
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Lubricants




                                                                                                                  Bioethanol
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Bioethanol




                                                                                                                                                        Surfactants
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Surfactants




                                                                                                   Forest Biom.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Forest Biom.




FIGURE 9.3 Relative gain (metric B) due to the bio-based product, relative to the substituted part of the conventional product (with a maximum value
of 100%), based on common functional units, for (a) nonrenewable primary energy, (b) global warming, (c) eutrophication, (d) acidification impact
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  251




changes.
252                                            Environmental Life Cycle Assessment


biomaterials, lubricants, and surfactants tend to show environmental benefits, while
LCAs for biofuel and energy crops tend to report a higher acidification potential
than petrochemical products. For correct interpretation, it is important to note that
the availability and reliability of data on primary energy consumption and global
warming are significantly greater than eutrophication and acidification, for which
data are limited.
   In terms of the gain in nonrenewable primary energy and in global warming
potential per cultivated hectare, the following general tendency can be observed
(Figure 9.2a and b): Reported gains may be high (> 300 GJ/ha-year, > 20 tCO2-eq/
ha-year) for certain agrimaterials and highly variable—from negative to high for
biopolymers. The two biomass categories (agriculture and forest) lead to moderate
(100–300 GJ/ha-year, 10–20 tCO2-eq/ha-year) gains per cultivated hectare. These
gains are more limited for biofuels and other uses of biomass (< 100 GJ/ha-year,
< 10 tCO2-eq/ha-year), with a few individual exceptions. These gains are compa-
rable with those obtained by Dornburg et al. (2004) for bio-based polymers and
bioenergy.
   For the relative gain in nonrenewable primary energy and in global warming
potential, the following general tendency can be observed (Figure 9.3a and b): As
was the case with the comparison per cultivated hectare, reported gains may be high
for some agrimaterials yet highly variable—from limited to moderate for biopoly-
mers. Agriculture and forest biomass are associated with high relative gains due to
limited use of energy in their supply chain. These relative gains are moderate for the
biofuels and other uses of biomass.
   The reason for these differences and the limitation for these categories is further
discussed in the following subsections for each specific group of bioproducts.

9.3.1.2 Agrimaterials
Transportation applications often show strong relative and absolute gains that are
possible with agrimaterials, because plant-source products (e.g., pallets, car parts
with natural vs. glass fibers) can be much lighter than their conventional fossil
counterparts. When a bio-based replacement is used, the energy gain linked to less
energy-intensive material can result in an energy gain of up to 200 GJ of primary
nonrenewable energy per hectare of fiber crop. In addition, in transportation, the
reduced weight of the agrimaterial allows for indirect gain and a corresponding
reduction in vehicle fuel consumption during the use stage, with a gain of sev-
eral hundred gigajoules per hectare of crop. This additional gain is only valid if
the change in weight of the considered part is reflected in the final weight of the
vehicle.
   Across all applications, useful lifetime and end-of-life recovery options are
important factors for the agrimaterials sector.
   Although interesting results are seen in the agrimaterials supply chain, great
potential exists for improvement. This is particularly true in the case of fiber materi-
als, because this is a relatively young technology that has not yet been optimized.
Uncertainty is relatively low for certain types of agrimaterials: The supply chain for
wood products is fairly well understood in terms of LCA data needs, but fiber sub-
supply chains have not been as extensively studied.
Metacomparison of Bio-Based Products                                                253


9.3.1.3 Biopolymers
The gains achieved from biopolymers are highly variable, because this supply chain
is highly variable and depends strongly on the application and the material that is
being substituted. Life cycle inventory knowledge of the biopolymer supply chain
is moderate (i.e., strong diversity of scenarios, with uncertainties). In addition, end-
of-life recovery of biopolymers and the choice of products replaced are important
parameters for the supply chain. Biopolymer biodegradability can be an asset or a
liability, depending on the end-of-life option chosen for the product. Given the rapid
development of the biopolymer supply chain, future environmental gains may be
more significant thanks to mass production and improved production technologies.

9.3.1.4 Agricultural and Forest Biomass
The relative gains achieved from bioenergy derived from agricultural and forest
biomass are strong (Figure 9.3: from 85% to close to 100%) because their supply
chains offer strong relative gains associated with the low energy requirements for
product manufacture. The absolute gain, normalized by cultivated area, is moderate.
This gain per cultivated area is slightly higher in the case of bioenergy from agri-
cultural biomass because of greater crop yield. However, combustion technology
must be improved to lessen the impact of these two supply chains on human health.
Although not included in the analysis, particulate emissions from the combustion of
biofuels can have significant human health implications and need to be mitigated.

9.3.1.5 Biofuels
Similar positive gains achieved from bioethanol and biodiesel are observed for
energy and greenhouse gases in Figures 9.2 and 9.3. However, the relative gain is
moderate, and the absolute gain is weak. This trend is because, in the case of bio-
fuels, the upstream supply chain is sometimes longer and more complex than in the
case of fossil resources.
   Reviewed studies show that the ether alcohol sector is fairly well understood in
terms of the cereal (wheat, corn) and sugar (sugar cane and sugar beet) subsupply
chains. However, the lignocellulose (wood, straw, grass, etc.) subsupply chains have
been far less well studied. Of note is that environmental gains in the lignocellulose
subsupply chains appear promising, since this chain can make use of coproducts that
are not yet well utilized (e.g., forest waste, pulp and paper, agricultural and munici-
pal coproducts). Therefore, improvement in the environmental performance of ether
alcohols may be possible through pairing with other plant supply chains (agricultural
biomass, etc.). Because data are contradictory, this gain remains to be validated.

9.3.1.6 Other Uses
Variable positive gains achieved from surfactants, lubricants, solvents, and other
chemicals are observed. However, knowledge of the supply chain of those products is
poor, so these positive gains should be interpreted with caution. Results show the fol-
lowing trends: (1) the conditions of use, allocation of coproduct emissions, and quan-
tities needed are important parameters for the lubricants supply chain; (2) the impact
of fossil solvents can be reduced through the use of other solvents not derived from
the plant resources supply chain (e.g., water-based paints instead of paints containing
254                                             Environmental Life Cycle Assessment


organic solvents); (3) for other chemicals, not enough information is available to
permit identification of general trends or trends associated with individual subsupply
chains. For the small sample of products studied, the environmental impact in the
various impact categories seems to follow trends similar to those of the other plant-
based supply chains. As far as the other impact categories are concerned, results are
not sufficiently reliable or well documented to permit identification of trends.


9.3.2 Key Parameters and Comparative Metrics
One of the outcomes of this study is the characterization of key factors that contribute
to the environmental benefits of different bio-based applications. The parameter most
directly associated with bio-based products is biodegradability. However, biodegrad-
ability is only an advantage when there is a need and opportunity for it. For instance,
chainsaw lubricants are completely lost during use and directly emitted into nature,
so biodegradability is an important benefit. Another example is waste bags that are
composted together with their contents (Heyde 1998) or biodegradable films used in
agriculture that can be left on fields after use and degrade into the soil. Such products
save the time and resources normally needed to remove conventional films and avoid
the need for the disposal of plastic waste. In most of the LCA studies analyzed, the
selected end-of-life options are crucial to the outcomes. Other factors to consider
when evaluating and comparing environmental impacts of bio-based products are the
type and yield of the biomass, the allocation of environmental impacts to coproducts
(e.g., straw), the definition of the FU, the amount of product necessary to fulfill the
FU, the technology for the production, and the lifetime of the product.
    As shown in the preceding sections, metrics to compare absolute change per hectare
of cultivated land (metric A) and change relative to a substituted part (metric B) allow
a comparison across studies and constitute an interesting basis for analyzing different
supply chains. Table 9.2 summarizes these metrics and shows their relation, as well as
inherent advantages and limitations, to comparisons possible for specific products or
applications. The quality of the land and the substitutability of the land is also impor-
tant and deserves further attention. Energy gains per hectare are especially interest-
ing when the considered area cannot easily be used for food production (e.g., forest),
avoiding competition between food and bio-based product or bioenergy.
    When land is readily available, cost often becomes the main limiting factor. In
that case, combining environmental and economic analyses is key, considering the
energy substituted per dollar of additional cost. The combined application of envi-
ronmental LCA and life cycle costing (as discussed in Section 6.8.1) may be used for
such analyses.


9.4 CONCLUSIONS
9.4.1 Comparison of Bioproducts
Results show that almost all of the bioproduct LCAs indicate significant positive
benefits over conventional products with respect to energy savings and reduced
global warming impacts, both per hectare of cultivated land and in terms of impact
TABLE 9.2
Advantages and Limitations of Comparison Metrics between Plant Resource Supply Chains and Their Reference Fossil
Resource Counterparts
Level of Comparison           Comparison Metrics                         Advantages                             Limitations                         Results
Meta-analysis          Absolute impacts (fossil − plant) per   Allows a comparison for all plant    Adds further uncertainties (yield,      Absolute value
                        hectare-year of cultivated biomass      and fossil supply chains.            quantity of plant material necessary
                                                               Shows optimization of available       per functional unit, coproducts)
                                                                agricultural areas
                                                                                                                                                                       Metacomparison of Bio-Based Products




Meta-analysis          Relative gain (fossil − plant)/fossil   Allows a comparison for all plant    Does not show absolute gain             Relative value (relative
                        product substituted per functional      and fossil supply chains.                                                    to fossil-derived
                        unit                                   Highlights products that use small                                            product replaced)
                                                                amounts of nonrenewable energy
                                                                for product manufacture
Application-specific   Impacts (fossil − plant) per            Respects system operation            Cannot compare systems that have        Absolute value
                        functional unit                                                              different functional units
Material/energy        Impacts (plant) and impacts (fossil)    Allows for easier comparison         May distort the comparison (e.g., if
                        per kilogram or per megajoule of                                             there are different quantities per
                        useful energy                                                                functional unit)
                                                                                                                                                                       255
256                                              Environmental Life Cycle Assessment


per FU. However, acidification and especially eutrophication often show increases in
impact. Results point out those products with the highest environmental benefits per
hectare of cultivated land: Natural fibers may exceed 300 GJ/ha-year, agricultural
and forest biomass achieve between 100 and 200 GJ/ha-year, and biofuel production
less than 100 GJ/ha-year. This comparison suggests that, given the limited areas
available for biomass production, applications such as bioethanol are of secondary
priority when land area is the limiting factor. For all bio-based products, the differ-
ent stages of development and optimization of production processes must inform the
interpretation of results.
    Overall, the use of biomass for bio-based materials and as energy crops offers a
higher potential for energy savings and greenhouse gas reduction than biofuels or prod-
ucts based on vegetable oils (e.g., lubricants and surfactants). As agricultural and forest
biomass require little processing when used for energy, their relative environmental
efficiency is very high. Although a similar trend is observed when comparing the envi-
ronmental impact per hectare of cultivated land, uncertainty increases somewhat due
to additional parameters such as yield, biomass content, and data on the environmental
impacts of the coproducts and their economic value. Despite these uncertainties, this
land-based metric can be used to compare possible uses of limited arable land.
    In addition, the comparison of plant and fossil resource supply chains illustrates
several important lessons that are generalizable to all the supply chains studied.
(1) No one plant resource supply chain stands out above all the others in all impact
categories. (2) The replacement of fossil fuels by plant supply chains reduces impacts
related to nonrenewable primary energy consumption and the global warming poten-
tial, except in the case of bacterial polymers and certain applications that involve the
use of other biopolymers. (3) With regard to the eutrophication impact category,
plant resource supply chains are often higher in impact than their fossil counterparts,
as they may require significant amounts of fertilizer. Plant resource supply chains
based on the use of coproducts may have lower eutrophication impacts. (4) Most of
the studies reviewed show that plant supply chains that produce chemicals have a
weaker acidification impact than fossil fuel chains. Conversely, these same studies
indicate that plant supply chains that produce energy have a greater acidification
impact than the reference fossil fuel supply chains. (5) The lack of data or poor data
reliability, and the variety in units used, prevent a meta-analysis of the supply chains
in terms of the following impact categories: destruction of the ozone layer, photo-
chemical pollution, terrestrial and aquatic toxicity, and human health.

9.4.2 Plant Resource Supply Chains
The following recommendations are intended to optimize the benefits from plant
resource supply chains, based on environmental considerations alone. However, con-
straints other than those of an environmental nature may create other priorities.

   • Focus on supply chains where the potential energy and global warming
     benefits are moderate to high (agrimaterials, biopolymers, agricultural bio-
     mass for bioenergy, and forest biomass for bioenergy), while taking excep-
     tions into account.
Metacomparison of Bio-Based Products                                               257


  • Emphasize supply chains in which the intrinsic characteristics of materials
    or energy from plant resources are superior to those of their fossil counter-
    parts (resistance, weight, useful life, biodegradability, quantities required to
    perform the same function, etc.), and look for both:
     • Direct advantages (low energy requirement for product manufacture,
         less than or comparable with that of fossil resources, longer useful life
         for materials, etc.).
     • Indirect advantages (fuel economy resulting from vehicle weight reduction
         giving the plant resource supply chain a greater than 100% advantage over
         fossil supply chain).
  • Promote synergies among supply chains (through the use of coproducts,
    etc.).
  • Support technological improvement in all supply chains. With the excep-
    tion of surfactants, plant resource supply chains are much less developed
    than their fossil counterparts, from both a technology and market share
    perspective. The gains to be achieved here are manifold. For example,
    advances in energy conversion technology will significantly impact supply
    chains for agrimaterials (fibers), biopolymers, forest biomass for bioenergy,
    and agricultural biomass for bioenergy.

   Consistent integration of other factors that currently limit the development of
plant resource supply chains, including market potential and economic viability, is
also desirable.

9.4.3 Improvement of LCA Knowledge
The following gaps in LCA knowledge are to be addressed in priority order to better
evaluate the environmental impacts of plant resource supply chains:

  • Broadening LCA knowledge in growth areas (strong potential in limited
    markets or moderate potential in larger markets or both) and improving the
    quantification of environmental gains associated with the supply chains in
    question: collect missing LCA data and update obsolete data. Integration
    of logistic chains (long-distance transportation) receives little attention in
    LCA studies and must also be a priority.
  • Using LCA approaches in R&D to investigate and invest in the most prom-
    ising plant supply chains.
  • Extending LCA to other limiting factors; for example, to a link to an eco-
    nomic study (or life cycle cost analysis) and to a study of the potential for
    substitution on a market scale.

9.4.4 Methodological Outlook
Bio-based products and conventional, petrochemical products have associated
environmental impacts. This study has not attempted to highlight a product or class
of products as “preferable,” for any such conclusions would depend on the weighting
258                                            Environmental Life Cycle Assessment


of the different impact categories within a sustainability framework. Rather, this
meta-analysis used two main cross-product and cross-supply chain metrics to indi-
cate that bio-based products, in general, present benefits in terms of nonrenewable
energy consumption and global warming impacts relative to conventional products.
However, when agricultural production is involved, the eutrophication potential is
usually higher for bio-based products than for petrochemical products. These con-
clusions might not hold when non-bio-based materials are lighter or have better
characteristics (e.g., for transport applications). Furthermore, technological advances
may have large influences on the production—and hence impacts—of bio-based
products, as many of these processes supply chains are still relatively young in com-
parison with comparable petrochemical systems.
    In terms of methodology development, such metastudies provide interesting
insights to compare different uses of a given resource or different processing or
treatment alternatives (e.g., waste treatment strategies). A thorough analysis of the
background hypotheses of each individual study and a selection of the best avail-
able studies is key for providing useful insights. Another crucial point is to define
a common metric that puts studies on a comparable basis across different types of
application, such as the change in impact per hectare of cultivated land between
the biomass and fossil scenarios. The present metastudy has focused on data for
the period 2000–2008. Since the number of LCAs of food and agriproducts have
substantially increased in recent years, an update to this metastudy would be of
high interest, whereas the general trends are expected to be robust. Metastudies do
not lend themselves to updates or to following the evolution in the environmental
performances of a given technology (here, additional data were collected for the
biodiesel five years after the initial study). Variations of hypotheses and background
data across different LCA studies make it difficult to identify gradual changes in
emissions and impacts per FU, unless there are dramatic changes. For this purpose
of trend analyses, scenario analysis within one consistent study is likely better suited
to follow up incremental changes in the performance of a given technology.
