      2        General Principles of
               Life Cycle Assessment
               Olivier Jolliet, Gabrielle Soucy, Shanna Shaked,
               Myriam Saadé-Sbeih, and Pierre Crettaz

This chapter defines the life cycle assessment (LCA), its goals, and key phases. It
explains the main characteristics of LCA and compares them with other environ-
mental analysis tools. A real-life example illustrates the approach by presenting a
comparison between different types of cups used in stadiums. At the end, two exer-
cises encourage the reader to apply and practice the topics covered in the chapter.

2.1 DEFINITION OF THE FOUR LCA PHASES
LCA evaluates the environmental impact of a product or service (sometimes referred
to just as a product for brevity); the assessment is based on a particular function and
considers all life cycle stages. It helps identify where environmental improvements
can be made in a product’s life cycle and aids in the designing of new products.
Primarily, this tool is used to compare various products, processes, or systems, as
well as the different life cycle stages of a particular product.
    According to the definitions provided in the International Organization for
Standardization (ISO) standards and by the Society of Environmental Toxicology
and Chemistry (SETAC), an LCA consists of a goal and scope definition, inventory
analysis, impact assessment, and interpretation of results (Figure 2.1). These four
phases are defined as follows:

   1. In the goal and scope definition (Chapter 3), the problem is described and the
      objectives and scope of the study are defined. A number of crucial elements
      are determined at this point: the function of the system, the functional unit on
      which the emissions and the extractions will be based, and the system bound-
      aries. The base scenario and the alternatives are described in detail.
   2. In the inventory analysis (Chapter 4), the polluting emissions to air, water,
      and soil are quantified, as well as the extractions of renewable and nonre-
      newable raw materials. The resource use required for the function of the
      system is also determined here.
   3. The impact assessment (Chapter 5) evaluates the environmental impacts
      due to the inventoried emissions. It can be broken down into the following
      steps (Jolliet et al. 2004):
      a. Selection of the impact categories, category indicators, and character-
           ization models

                                                                                         7
8                                                Environmental Life Cycle Assessment



                         Goal and scope
                           definition


                           Inventory
                                                       Interpretation
                            analysis


                             Impact
                           assessment




FIGURE 2.1 The four iterative phases of life cycle assessment.

       b. Classification of the emissions that contribute to each environmental
            impact category (global warming, human toxicity, ecotoxicity, resource
            use, etc.)
       c. Midpoint characterization weights and aggregates the emissions into
            midpoint impact categories
       d. Damage characterization aggregates impact categories into damage
            categories (damage to human health, ecosystem quality, resources, etc.)
       e. An additional normalization step may be carried out to show the con-
            tribution of the studied product as a fraction of the global impact in a
            given impact category
        f. Finally, the impact assessment can be completed with a socially based
            weighting to account for the relative importance—or, ideally, dam-
            age—of the midpoint impacts
    4. The interpretation (Chapter 6) is where the results obtained so far are
       interpreted and the uncertainties are evaluated. The key parameters and
       improvement options can be identified using sensitivity studies and uncer-
       tainty propagation, and a critical analysis evaluates the influence of the cho-
       sen boundaries and hypotheses. Finally, the environmental impacts can be
       compared with economic or social impacts.
       These four phases of LCA will be examined in detail in the following chap-
       ters, but it is important to note that they have not all reached the same level
       of maturity.
       a. The goal and scope definition phase is well developed.
       b. New developments are required to further the inventory phase, par-
            ticularly in allocation, where it is necessary to allocate emissions and
            extractions from one product to another coproduct (Section 4.5). Also,
            data availability and reliability need to be improved.
       c. Major progress has recently been made in impact assessment. Analysis
            frameworks are now well defined in most impact categories. Midpoint
            characterization factors are now available for classical categories such as
            global warming and acidification, and a first consensus at international
General Principles of Life Cycle Assessment                                             9


         level has been reached for toxicity impacts. Further work on spatializa-
         tion is ongoing. Initial damage characterization methods are available
         but require additional refinements. Many questions remain undecided
         regarding weighting and the final evaluation of damages.
      d. Few studies include an uncertainty analysis at the interpretation phase,
         but there have been recent developments in uncertainty methods that
         can be applied to LCA. This gap should be filled as a priority in future
         LCA practice.

   Chapters 7 and 8 provide a complementary overview, identifying the key point
and critical issues of each LCA phase and illustrating them through a comprehensive
application of LCA to urban sewage sludge treatment.
   LCA has been increasingly used to perform meta-analyses, reviewing all avail-
able LCAs about a given topic (e.g., solid waste treatment options and use of biomass)
to provide ranges of main environmental life cycle indicators. Chapter 9 presents an
example of such a meta-analysis applied to the life cycle environmental impacts of
bio-based products.

2.2     PERFORMING AN LCA
2.2.1 Iterative Method
It is strongly recommended to perform an LCA in two steps:

   1. The preliminary evaluation or screening is a quick and simple analysis
      where the order of magnitude of each life cycle stage contribution is evalu-
      ated. An initial sensitivity study gives an indication of the key processes
      and impacts so that less time is spent on aspects which have a negligible
      overall contribution.
   2. Secondly, a more detailed analysis is performed by repeating in greater
      depth the goal and scope definition, inventory, and impact assessment
      phases. The information gathered in the preliminary evaluation is used to
      identify emissions, processes, and stages with the greatest environmental
      impacts that need to be further explored in priority order. The final interpre-
      tation phase includes a detailed sensitivity study and uncertainty analysis.
      The study may be finalized by a comparison of environmental impacts with
      socioeconomic performance.

2.2.2    Calculations by Hand and Using Software
Preliminary calculations, generally for energy consumption and CO2 emissions, can
be made by hand or by using a spreadsheet. When more substances in the inven-
tory are considered, it is recommended to use software specifically designed for
LCA, while still carrying out energy and CO2 balances by hand as a check (see
Section 4.2.2). The most commonly used software programs are described in
Section 6.7 and Appendix II.
10                                              Environmental Life Cycle Assessment


2.3 CHARACTERISTICS SPECIFIC TO LCA AND COMPARISON
     WITH OTHER ENVIRONMENTAL ANALYSIS TOOLS
2.3.1 Characteristics Specific to Life Cycle Assessment
Characteristics specific to LCA are as follows:

     • LCA focuses on the environmental impacts of a product or service. When
       choosing among various alternatives, the final decision is made by combin-
       ing the results of the LCA with other aspects such as costs, social implica-
       tions, economic performance, and technical feasibility. These aspects are
       evaluated with other complementary analysis tools, such as life cycle cost-
       ing (Section 6.8.1).
     • LCA links these environmental impacts to the system’s function, which
       facilitates a comparison between alternatives.
     • Quantified balances are made over the entire life cycle of a product
       or service, from cradle to grave, from raw material acquisition to waste
       management.
     • LCA accounts for all major environmental issues known today (global
       warming, resource extraction, impacts of toxic substances on humans and
       ecosystems, land use, etc.).

    A partial LCA can also be conducted by considering only the direct activities of
a company from gate to gate. Due to global supply chains, however, this does not
yield a complete overview of the considered system and can lead to biased results.
If a company creates a product, it is essential to account for the entirety of the prod-
uct’s life cycle activities to avoid suggesting local environmental improvements that
effectively export pollution to other parts of the life cycle. These life cycle activities
take place upstream from the business in question as well as downstream, including,
for example, the type of material that needs to be extracted, the electricity required
during the use stage, or the disposal required in waste management.

2.3.2 Comparison with Other Environmental Analysis Tools
LCA provides information that can be used by governments, businesses, and con-
sumers when making a decision. Other decision-making tools are available, each
with its specific role and set of complementary information. Figure 2.2 illustrates the
positioning of LCA in relation to other environmental instruments and other more
general approaches to sustainable development.
   In general, actions and policies are directly influenced by overarching concepts
and procedural environmental methods. Such procedural tools include ecolabeling,
which labels a set of products or services within a specific functional category as
environmentally friendly, and environmental audits, which assess the environmental
performance of an individual business and provide follow-up suggestions. An envi-
ronmental impact assessment (EIA) focuses on predicting the impact of a planned
installation at a precise location; thus, it corresponds more to a legal procedure than
a quantitative tool.
General Principles of Life Cycle Assessment                                            11


                                  Management, decision-making

                                      Technological system
                                      Performance, lifetime

                         Environmental aspects                    Socioeconomic
                  Concepts                                           aspects
          Life cycle thinking
          Environmental design
                                           Procedural methods     Life cycle costing
          Industrial ecology
                                           Environmental
           Quantitative assessment         management systems     Social life cycle
                                                                  assessment
          Life cycle assessment            Environmental impact
          Substance flow analysis          assessment
          Risk assessment
                                           Ecolabel
          Material flow analysis
          Carbon or water footprint        Environmental audit



FIGURE 2.2 Relationships between various tools to assess the sustainability of a good or
service, inspired by Wrisberg et al. (2002).

  These procedural methods are often based on environmental quantitative assess-
ment tools, the most commonly used of which are described as follows:

   • A life cycle assessment quantifies a large number of resource uses, sub-
     stance flows, and environmental accumulations to estimate multiple envi-
     ronmental impacts associated with a given function.
   • A substance flow analysis (SFA) quantifies the flows and environmental
     accumulation of either a single substance, such as mercury, or a group of
     substances, such as inorganic nitrate compounds.
   • A risk assessment (RA) studies the risk or the probability of severe impacts
     occurring from an installation (such as a nuclear power plant) or the risks of
     using a chemical substance.
   • A material flow analysis (MFA) tracks the flow of material in the economy
     of a given region. This is usually a raw material, such as paper, glass, con-
     crete, or plastics.
   • A carbon footprint (CF) determines the direct and indirect emissions of
     greenhouse gases due to a product, a human activity, or a business.
   • A water footprint (WF) determines the impacts associated with water as
     an area of concern, including water usage and environmental exposures
     related to water quality.

   These tools cover a range of objects, scales, and effects (Table 2.1), and some
basic elements can be common to several tools.

2.3.2.1 Comparison between Substance Flow Analysis and LCA
SFA focuses on the transfers among various environmental media (e.g., air, water, or
soil) of a single substance associated with a given region or industry, whereas LCA
                                                                                                                                                     12




TABLE 2.1
Main Characteristics of Environmental Analysis Tools
                                                                         Considered Substances
Tool                      Object of Study         Scale and Scope             and Impacts             Basis for Comparison       Basic Elements
Life cycle assessment    Product or service      Global or regional     Many substances               Function of the product   Mass balance
 (LCA)                                           Entire life cycle      Multiple impacts on humans     or service               Multimedia model
                                                                         and ecosystems                                         Effects assessment
Substance flow           Polluting substance     Regional or global     Single substance              Given time and region     Mass balance
 analysis (SFA)                                  Substance cycle        No impact                                               Multimedia model
Risk assessment (RA)     Installation or         Local or regional      Relevant substances           Maximum level of risk     Multimedia model
                          chemical substance     Selected stage         Toxicity                                                Effects assessment
Material flow analysis   Raw material or         Regional or national   Single or multiple material   Given time and region     Mass balance
 (MFA)                    compound               Material life cycle    No impact                                               Material flow
                                                                                                                                 tracking
Carbon footprint (CF)    Product, activity, or   Global                 Greenhouse gases              Product function,         Mass balance
                          company                Entire life cycle      Climate change                 activity, or company     Global warming
                                                                                                                                 potential
Water footprint (WF)     Product, activity, or   Local or regional      Water consumed and            Product function,         Water balance
                          company                                        water-related exposure        activity, or company     Consumption
                                                 Most important life    Water quantity and                                      Competition
                                                  cycle stages           quality-related impacts                                Adaptation
Environmental impact     New localized           Local scale            Highly variable               Local carrying capacity   Highly variable
 assessment (EIA)         activity               Local activity
                                                                                                                                                     Environmental Life Cycle Assessment
General Principles of Life Cycle Assessment                                                   13


considers the environmental fate of a large number of substances associated with a
product function, and then estimates impacts by accounting for the multiple effects
of these substances. Both methods rely on mass balances to perform calculations and
validate the emissions and extraction inventory.

2.3.2.2 Comparison between Environmental Impact Assessment and LCA
The comparison between LCA and EIA is presented in Figure 2.3, depicting the
complementary temporal and spatial scales over which each tool is usually applied.
LCA is applied to a product or service, from resource extraction (cradle) to the end
of life (grave), on a global scale if needed, whereas the analysis in an EIA is carried
out on a specific site. For a site-specific evaluation, an EIA better considers condi-
tions particular to the area, such as the number of inhabitants close to the site, the
distance between the site and residential neighborhoods, and the presence of certain
ecosystems. The ideal tool capable of covering local and global scales from cradle to
grave does not yet exist because of the amount of data and computational resources
needed, but one prototype of a multiscale multimedia model is currently in develop-
ment at the University of Michigan (Wannaz et al. 2012).

2.3.2.3 Comparison between Risk Assessment and LCA
LCA has some common elements with RA, particularly in the evaluation of human
toxicity and ecotoxicity. Both methods consider the transfer of pollutants among
air, water, soil, and food, and they both use dose–response models to quantify the
impacts of human and ecosystem exposure to substances. RA differs from LCA
in that it is a regulatory-oriented approach, in which hazard-based indicators are
based on conservative assumptions and include safety factors to ensure that expo-
sure levels are substantially below the no-observable-effect levels. Such indicators,
however, may not provide a consistent basis for relative comparison across chemi-
cals. Rather than maximum estimates, LCA aims to assess comparative risk and the

                                             Global


                                              LCA


                            “Cradle”                         “Grave”



                                               EIA



                                              Local


FIGURE 2.3 Comparison between environmental impact assessment and life cycle assess-
ment, based on production cycle covered and localization scale. “Cradle” refers to the begin-
ning of the life cycle (raw material extraction), and “grave” refers to the end of the life cycle
(waste disposal).
14                                            Environmental Life Cycle Assessment


average contribution of a product or service to a number of environmental impacts
(Pennington et al. 2006). Local maximum permissible concentrations or acute toxic-
ity events are thus not usually addressed by an LCA.

2.3.2.4 Comparison between Material Flow Analysis and LCA
MFA and LCA both use mass balance modeling. An MFA merely tracks material
flows in a region, whereas an LCA uses these flows in modeling the economic system
and unit processes, calculating the emissions and extractions of raw materials related
to these material flows.

2.3.2.5 Comparison between Carbon Footprint and LCA
The CF is simply the global warming component of the LCA, and can thus be
applied to a product, activity, or company. While an LCA can estimate how various
scenarios can shift impacts among different impact categories, a CF focuses solely
on the greenhouse effect category.

     In summary, an LCA quantifies material flows throughout the life cycle of a
     product or service, from which the impacts can be estimated for a comprehen-
     sive set of environmental impact categories. LCA is the only method to relate
     multiple environmental impacts to the function of a product or service.


   The life cycle concept is not limited to environmental impacts; the results
of an environmental LCA can be combined with those of an economic analysis
(Section 6.8.1), a technical analysis (life cycle engineering, Lundquist et al. 2000),
or a social analysis (social LCA, Section 6.8.5), thereby integrating the different
aspects of sustainability.

2.4 SIMPLE APPLICATION: COMPARING DIFFERENT TYPES
     OF CUPS
This section presents a comparison among different types of cups to illustrate how
an LCA is carried out. The basic hypotheses for this example were adapted from
Bättig (2002), where single-use cups are compared with multiuse cups. Chapter 8
presents a more elaborate case study demonstrating the application of LCA, compar-
ing different options for sewage sludge treatment.

2.4.1 Goal and Scope Definition of Cup Case Study
The main objective of this LCA is to compare the environmental impacts of different
types of cups used in stadiums during sporting or cultural events.
   The functional unit used as a basis for comparison must be common to all sce-
narios and represent the considered function (Section 3.3). Since the purpose of the
cup is to contain a certain volume of drink, the corresponding functional unit is
one use of a 300 mL cup. Therefore, the various substance emissions and resource
extractions listed in the inventory will be calculated for one use of one cup.
General Principles of Life Cycle Assessment                                                         15



 TABLE 2.2
 Processes Included within the System Boundaries
 Single-Use Cup                                                    Multiuse Cup
 Cup manufacturing                                  Cup manufacturing
 Transportation (from production site to stadium)   Transportation (from production site to stadium)
 Cleaning of the stadium
                                                    Transportation (to and from washing facility)
                                                    Washing of the cup
 Elimination (incineration)                         Elimination (incineration)



   The system processes considered are presented in Table 2.2. For a single-use cup,
this includes the manufacturing of the cup, its transportation to the stadium where
the event takes place, the cleaning of the stadium using air blowers, and the elimina-
tion of the cup. For a multiuse cup, the stadium cleaning is assumed to be unneces-
sary, since cups are collected and reused rather than left on the stadium floor, but
washing the cup and its transportation to and from the washing facility must be
included. The production and use of detergent for washing the cup are not considered
here. The manufacturing and elimination of the infrastructure for cup production
are excluded because their impact per cup produced over the entire lifetime of the
production infrastructure is considered negligible.
   Some of the key parameters in this study are the transportation variables and
the number of times a cup is reused, both of which can vary considerably depend-
ing on event logistics and user behavior. The important transportation variables are
the distance traveled, the mode of transportation, and the size of the load, all of
which are necessary data for the calculation of the impacts of any transportation.
The number of cup uses is also an important parameter, since any process that
occurs only once in a cup’s life (such as raw material extraction, manufacturing,
and elimination) has its impacts distributed over each use. For a multiuse cup made
of polycarbonate (PC) or polypropylene that can be reused 150 times, the impacts
of the one-time processes (shaded in Table 2.2) should be divided by 150 to yield
the impact contribution of one use of a cup (assuming no losses). The actual number
of reuses, however, is much lower due to losses during the event or in transit (cups
may be damaged, discarded, etc.). This can be accounted for by introducing a loss
percentage.
   To examine the influence of these parameters on the total impacts, the material,
number of uses, and transportation parameters are varied as follows:

   • A paper cup, used once
   • A polyethylene (PET) cup, used once
   • A PC cup, used 150 times, without accounting for transportation between
     the stadium and the washing facility
   • A PC cup, used 150 times, with 5% losses at every event, and 50 km trans-
     portation distance to be washed (round trip to the cleaning facility by car
     loaded with 1000 cups)
16                                             Environmental Life Cycle Assessment


   Note that the last scenario derives from a sensitivity study carried out by the
authors of this book and was not presented in the original study.

2.4.2 Inventory Analysis of Cup Case Study
The inventory quantifies the pollutant emissions to water, air, and soil, as well as the
extractions of raw material from the environment, over all processes in the life cycle
of each scenario. It does so by first quantifying the main intermediary flows required
per cup use (e.g., key transportation distances and amounts of paper or PET used per
functional unit), and then finding the pollutant emissions and resource extraction
factors associated with each of these flows (see Section 4.1 for more details on the
inventory). Table 2.3 shows an excerpt of this inventory for each scenario.
   The PC multiuse cup, without losses or transport to washing facility systemati-
cally has the lowest emissions and extractions per functional unit. For the remain-
ing three scenarios, it is not possible to define a ranking from the inventory results
alone; the single-use paper cup has the highest emissions of cadmium in air and
hexavalent chromium in water, while the single-use PET cup requires the extrac-
tion of a large amount of crude oil. When losses and transportation to the washing
facility are taken into account, the PC cup emits more CO and N2O in air than the
other scenarios.
   Therefore, it is difficult, based solely on the inventory results, to draw conclu-
sions about the relative impacts of the different scenarios, or about the processes and
emissions that contribute most to these impacts. This is precisely the purpose of the
impact assessment phase, as demonstrated in the following section.

2.4.3 Impact Assessment of Cup Case Study
The impact assessment phase estimates the impacts of the inventory’s emissions and
extractions on various areas of protection (human health, ecosystem quality, natural
resources, etc.). Different impact assessment methods can be used for this evalu-
ation, each of which uses different models to calculate environmental impacts by
category. In this example, the Eco-indicator 99 method is used, which is described in
more detail in Section 5.5, along with other impact assessment methods.
   Based on Eco-indicator 99 calculations, the single-use PET cup has the highest
damage score for all three damage categories considered: human health, ecosystem
quality, and resource degradation (Figure 2.4). The multiuse PC cup (assuming no
losses or transportation to the washing facility) results in the least impact. The other
two scenarios fall in the middle, with the paper cup having slightly less impact
than the PC cup with losses and transportation for the three damage categories
considered.
   Since the relative ranking of scenarios is identical in all three damage categories,
we simplify the remaining discussion by using the total aggregated impact.
(Section 5.2.3 explains how different categories can be combined into a single score.)
As defined in the Eco-indicator 99 method (Section 5.5.3), the total impact is calcu-
lated as a weighted sum of each area of protection. Here, we express this total impact
score by contribution from each process (Figure 2.5).
General Principles of Life Cycle Assessment                                                   17



TABLE 2.3
Excerpt from the Inventory of Pollutant Emissions and Resource Extractions
for Each Scenario (per Functional Unit, i.e., One Use of One 300 mL Cup)
                                                                     PC with Transportation
Substance           Unit     Paper          PET           PC              and Losses

Emissions to Air
Benzo[a]pyrene       g     3.4 × 10−9    3.2 × 10−9    4.9 × 10−10         3.0 × 10−9
Cd                   g     4.4 × 10−7    2.4 × 10−7    1.1 × 10−8          3.9 × 10−8
CH4                  g       0.0277        0.0358        0.0016              0.0279
CO                   g        0.013         0.148         0.006               0.277
CO2                  g         9.2           18.2          0.9                 18.5
Hg                   g     2.3 × 10−7    2.6 × 10−7    1.2 × 10−8          1.2 × 10−7
N2O                  g     2.0 × 10−4    1.1 × 10−4    1.0 × 10−5          9.1 × 10−4
NH3                  g     2.0 × 10−4    9.0 × 10−6    1.0 × 10−6          6.0 × 10−6
NMVOC                g        0.029         0.294         0.011               0.172
NOx                  g        0.044         0.161      7.0 × 10−3             0.089
Particles            g        0.014         0.028      1.0 × 10−3             0.011
Pb                   g     2.7 × 10−6    2.4 × 10−6    3.0 × 10−7          1.3 × 10−5
SOx                  g        0.044         0.185      7.0 × 10−3             0.074

Emissions to Water
Al                 g        0.00125       0.00155       0.00011             0.00078
As                 g       2.5 × 10−6    3.1 × 10−6    2.1 × 10−7          1.7 × 10−6
BOD                g         0.0554        0.0096        0.0003              0.0025
Cr (VI)            g       1.3 × 10−6    3.7 × 10−10   4.1 × 10−11         2.0 × 10−10
Cu                 g       6.6 × 10−6    7.8 × 10−6    5.2 × 10−7          4.3 × 10−6
NH4+               g       6.3 × 10−5    2.6 × 10−4    1.0 × 10−5          4.7 × 10−4
Ni                 g       6.5 × 10−6    8.0 × 10−6    5.2 × 10−7          4.5 × 10−6
Pb                 g       9.7 × 10−6    1.1 × 10−5    1.0 × 10−6          5.2 × 10−6

Emissions to Soil
As                   g     5.0 × 10−8    3.1 × 10−8    9.0 × 10−10         5.8 × 10−9
Cd                   g     2.5 × 10−9    1.7 × 10−9    1.0 × 10−10         7.0 × 10−10
Cr                   g     6.2 × 10−7    3.9 × 10−7    1.1 × 10−8          7.2 × 10−8
Cu                   g     1.4 × 10−8    8.6 × 10−9    2.0 × 10−10         1.2 × 10−9
Hg                   g     3.9 × 10−10   2.4 × 10−10   6.0 × 10−12         3.7 × 10−11
Ni                   g     2.1 × 10−8    1.3 × 10−8    3.0 × 10−10         1.9 × 10−9
Pb                   g     6.4 × 10−8    3.9 × 10−8    9.0 × 10−10         5.7 × 10−9
Zn                   g     2.0 × 10−6    1.3 × 10−6    3.0 × 10−8          2.0 × 10−7

Resource Extraction
Coal                g         0.78          1.17          0.07                0.55
Natural gas       dm3         2.14          3.28          0.14                1.31
Copper ore          g      3.0 × 10−4    2.2 × 10−4    1.8 × 10−5          1.0 × 10−4
Lead ore           G       3.5 × 10−4    3.6 × 10−4    5.5 × 10−5          4.1 × 10−4
Crude oil          G          2.74          9.87          0.36                6.37
18                                                                                Environmental Life Cycle Assessment


                                         100
                                          90
                                          80
                                          70
                  Damage score (%)



                                          60
                                          50
                                          40
                                          30
                                          20
                                          10
                                           0
                                                     Human health        Ecosystem quality            Resources

                                                  Paper cup    PET cup    PC cup      PC cup w/transport and losses


FIGURE 2.4 Proportional damage scores for the different cups, relative to the PET (poly-
ethylene) cup. “PC cup” refers to the multiuse polycarbonate cup. Damage calculated using
Eco-indicator 99.


                                        5.0E–03
                                        4.5E–03
     Aggregated impact score (points)




                                        4.0E–03
                                                                                                    Disposal
                                        3.5E–03
                                                                                                    Cup washing
                                        3.0E–03
                                                                                                    Transport to washing
                                        2.5E–03
                                                                                                    Stadium cleaning
                                        2.0E–03
                                                                                                    Transport to stadium
                                        1.5E–03
                                                                                                    Manufacturing
                                        1.0E–03
                                        5.0E–04
                                        0.0E+00
                                                   Paper cup   PET cup   PC cup       PC cup
                                                                                  w/transport and
                                                                                       losses


FIGURE 2.5 Total aggregated environmental impacts of the different cup scenarios and dis-
tribution by life cycle stage. The Eco-indicator 99 method was used to compare total impacts
of a paper cup, a single-use polyethylene (PET) cup, and multiuse polycarbonate (PC) cups.


   For all cups, the manufacturing stage (including raw material extraction) accounts
for most of the total impact. The impacts of transportation to the stadium and clean-
ing of the stadium are limited. Assuming a 5% loss in the multiuse PC cup greatly
increases each cup’s manufacturing impact to a level equivalent to that of the single-
use paper cup. Moreover, a 50 km round-trip between the stadium and the washing
facility would almost double the impact of the PC cup with losses. The stadium
General Principles of Life Cycle Assessment                                          19


cleaning stage is small in single-use cup scenarios (and assumed not to occur in the
multiuse scenarios). The elimination at the end of the cup’s life has a small contribu-
tion in all four scenarios.

2.4.4 Interpretation of Cup Case Study
The single-use PET cup is clearly the least advantageous scenario, and a multiuse
PC cup with no losses or transportation for washing is clearly the best scenario.
But, there is no clear-cut conclusion about which is the better scenario between the
paper cup and the more realistic multiuse PC cup that assumes losses and washing
transportation. A comparison of the two PC cup scenarios clearly shows the nega-
tive environmental impacts of losses and transportation for washing; we find that
accounting for these reverses the relative ranking of the PC cup and the paper cup.
This is partly because a 5% loss per event reduces the actual number of reuses from
150 to 20, increasing the manufacturing impact per functional unit by more than a
factor of seven. Moreover, transportation to the washing facilities leads to consider-
able impacts. This study assumes a 50 km journey by a fully loaded truck with 1000
cups, but the actual impacts will depend on the type of vehicle and the load; a cup
carried by a smaller or only partially loaded car has a bigger impact than a cup car-
ried in a large truck containing 20,000 cups. The large impact contributions of losses
and transportation demonstrate the sensitivity of the results to the hypotheses made,
and the need to best reflect the actual situation.
   Finally, it should be noted that the results of the impacts of washing do not account
for the washing agent and should, therefore, be treated with caution. The impact of
soap can indeed be significant, particularly on ecosystem quality (eutrophication and
ecotoxicity).

2.4.5    Conclusions of Cup Case Study
For a single-use cup, this example finds that a paper cup has less environmental
impact than a PET cup. It also shows the value of using multiuse cups if there are
negligible losses and transportation needs. In practice, the losses should be assessed
and included, since a loss of 5% causes the impacts of multiuse cups to become
equivalent to or even more harmful than those of single-use paper cups.
   Zooming out to consider such large entertainment events as a whole, it is clearly
beneficial to reduce the environmental impacts of cups, but it is even better to act
where the impacts are highest. For a sporting event, for example, the impact of the
cups is relatively small compared with that of the transportation of people to the
location of the event; in fact, the impact of one paper cup is approximately equivalent
to the impact of transporting one person by car over only 100 m (Figure 2.6). This
means that a 10 km trip is 100 times more harmful to the environment than a paper
cup. Based on these results, efforts to reduce the impacts of such an event should
focus first on the transportation of people to the stadium; for example, by active
promotion of the use of public transport. Materials and waste management should be
addressed as a second priority.
20                                                                                 Environmental Life Cycle Assessment


                                                 1.4 × 10–2



              Aggregated impact score (points)
                                                 1.2 × 10–2
                                                 1.0 × 10–2
                                                 8.0 × 10–3
                                                 6.0 × 10–3
                                                 4.0 × 10–3
                                                 2.0 × 10–3
                                                         0
                                                              1 person-km by car            Paper cup


FIGURE 2.6 Comparison between the environmental impact of a single-use paper cup and
the transportation of one person by car over 1 km (1 person-km).



EXERCISES
Exercise 2.1: Choose the Best Environmental Evaluation Method
and Key Metrics
Decide which assessment method listed in Table 2.1 is most appropriate for the
following situations. List key reasons for using this method, and find an appropriate
metric/basis for comparison.

     1. An electricity company is investing $50 million to integrate photovoltaics
        into the design of commercial and residential buildings. It wants to estimate
        the environmental benefits of this design, assuming 1000 buildings will be
        constructed around the country.
     2. An airline company would like to optimize its company’s greenhouse gas
        emissions.
     3. You need decide whether to use paper or plastic bags to carry your grocer-
        ies home.
     4. An electricity company is deciding in which of two cities to build its new
        power plant.
     5. You want to decide whether to take the car, bus, train, or airplane from
        Chicago to New York City based on environmental impacts.
     6. A chemical leak occurs in a manufacturing plant, and it needs to decide
        whether or not to evacuate people from the area.
     7. Afterward, the manufacturing plant in (6) must determine the best decon-
        tamination method for the site where this leak occurs.
     8. Regional authorities are considering creating a recycling auction for old
        materials and want to decide which materials to include.
     9. Congress wants to examine the impacts of using biofuels in the federal fleet
        of vehicles.
General Principles of Life Cycle Assessment                                          21


Exercise 2.2: Comparing Cups for a Stadium Event
Based on the information and example provided in Section 2.4, answer the following
questions.

   1. List two preliminary conclusions you can make based solely on the num-
      bers in the inventory on Table 2.2. List two benefits of subsequently apply-
      ing impact assessment to this inventory.
   2. What are the key parameters affecting the environmental impact of the
      multiuse PC cup?
   3. What is the approximate total aggregated impact score (in points) of a mul-
      tiuse PC cup, still assuming 5% loss, but assuming that the washing facility
      is right next to the stadium (use Figure 2.5 for help)?
   4. Which result surprised you most about the cup case study and why?
   5. In performing an environmental assessment of a sports game, list two other
      factors to consider (and provide reasoning) (other than cup usage and trans-
      portation of spectators to the game).
   6. Provide a functional unit that would enable you to compare the relative
      impacts of a spectator drinking from a cup at the game and the transporta-
      tion of a spectator to the game.
