      3         Goal and System
                Definition
                Olivier Jolliet, Gabrielle Soucy, Shanna Shaked,
                Myriam Saadé-Sbeih, and Pierre Crettaz

The goal and system definition is the first phase of a life cycle assessment (LCA). It
may seem trivial, but the LCA results are often strongly dependent on the choices
made in this key phase. In the International Organization for Standardization (ISO)
norm 14040 (described in Chapter 1), this phase is referred to as the goal and scope
definition. In this book, we refer to it as the goal and system definition to highlight to
the reader the importance of clearly delineating and describing a system. This phase
consists of, firstly, describing the objectives—what is the purpose of the LCA, what
are the results going to be used for, who is the audience, and who are the stakehold-
ers? Secondly, the function of the system considered is analyzed to define a unit that
represents this function. Different scenarios are described to achieve this functional
unit (FU). Finally, the system boundaries are specified.

3.1 OBJECTIVES
The goal and system definition begins with a description of the study objectives, which
determines the problem and defines the intended application for the LCA results,
including the intended audience, the stakeholders, and the scope of the study. In con-
trast to the subsequent more technical stages in an LCA, this step is more descriptive.
Moreover, it requires discussion of all options and possible alternatives among the
different stakeholders in order to increase credibility and ensure relevant results.

3.1.1 Goal: Type of Application, Intended Audience, and Stakeholders
According to ISO 14044 (section 4.2.2),

   in defining the goal of an LCA, the following items shall be unambiguously stated:
      • The intended application,
      • The reasons for carrying out the study,
      • The intended audience i.e., to whom the results of the study are intended to
        be communicated, and
      • Whether the results are intended to be used in comparative assertions
        intended to be disclosed to the public.
The intent of a given LCA should be clearly specified to avoid ambiguity among the
potential applications and audiences, as demonstrated by the following examples.

                                                                                        23
24                                              Environmental Life Cycle Assessment


     • Information on an existing product: LCA has often been used to provide
       information on the environmental impacts of products, most commonly as
       a comparison of available alternatives.
     • Development of a new product: In developing a new product, an LCA can
       first be conducted on the existing or initial product prototype. Improvement
       options are then selected and evaluated based on environmental, technical,
       or financial factors. The different production variants are compared against
       one another and the initial product.
     • Elaboration of political strategies: Because of its potential for broad appli-
       cation, an LCA can also be used to compare different political strategies.
       For example, to provide input on future European agricultural policy, a
       comparison of the environmental impacts of intensive, integrated, and bio-
       logical production systems would be relevant. ADEME (France’s agency
       for environment and energy management) has published several state-of-
       the-art reviews on LCAs of waste treatment, biomass use, and agricultural
       systems (BIO Intelligence Service S.A. 2002; Houillon et al. 2004).
     • Regulation of an existing product: LCA can also be used to evaluate a prod-
       uct to provide information for regulatory purposes. It is, however, primarily
       intended as a voluntary tool rather than a compliance-oriented tool.

   Even if all audiences are interested in decreasing environmental impacts, con-
sumers, producers, and governments each have different perspectives on how to
do so. Consumers want to know product impacts to make wise purchasing choices.
Manufacturers generally want to know how to reduce the pollution caused by
their products or, less frequently, to highlight their environmental advantages.
Governments need reliable information to refine environmental policies or to devise
incentives to promote environmental behaviors.
   The identity and addresses of the main stakeholders should also be provided,
including the sponsors, authors, advisory board, analysts, and optional independent
peer reviewers (as addressed in Section 6.4.2). If the intended audience is external,
the credibility of the LCA is increased by having the LCA commissioners, analysts,
and peer reviewers all be independent entities.
   An external review is generally optional, but becomes necessary for an ISO-
compatible study involving a comparative assertion. Section 6.4 further addresses the
peer review process, which needs to be planned and budgeted from the start of the study.

3.1.2 Scope
Once the goal is determined, the scope of an LCA must take into account and clearly
describe the following elements (ISO 14044, Section 4.2.3.1):

     • The product system to be studied (in this work, we refer to this as the system
       rather than the product system term used by ISO, because the system can
       also be used to analyze services)
     • The function of the system, or of the systems in the case of comparative
       studies
Goal and System Definition                                                             25


   •   The functional unit (FU)
   •   The system boundary
   •   Allocation procedures (Chapter 4)
   •   Life cycle impact assessment (LCIA) methodology and types of impacts
       (Chapter 5)
   •   Interpretation to be used (Chapter 6)
   •   Data requirements
   •   Assumptions
   •   Value choices and optional elements
   •   Limitations
   •   Data quality requirements
   •   Type of critical review, if any
   •   Type and format of the report required for the study

    The scope of the study must be sufficiently well defined to ensure that the breadth,
depth, and level of detail match the set objective. LCA is an iterative approach
(Section 2.2); thus, the scope may be adjusted based on information collected during
the analysis.
    In the following sections, we describe and provide examples of the most funda-
mental elements of the goal and scope definition: a description of the system func-
tion, a definition of the FU (and associated reference flows), and, finally, how the
system is defined and bounded. The remaining key elements, such as the allocation
of impacts among coproducts and by-products and the selection of LCIA methods,
are described in more detail in Chapters 4 and 5.
    When considering the scope of an LCA, we can broadly distinguish between two
types of modeling approaches, attributional and consequential LCA, as defined by
Finnveden et al. (2009, p. 3): “Attributional LCA is defined by its focus on describing
the environmentally relevant physical flows to and from a life cycle and its subsystems.
Consequential LCA is defined by its aim to describe how environmentally relevant
flows will change to possible decisions (Curran et al. 2005).” A typical example of the
difference between these two approaches is the choice of the electricity mix to model
the electricity production in a process LCA. An attributional LCA would typically
consider the average electricity mix in the considered region of interdependent electric-
ity distribution, such as the average European electricity mix, with the risk that a given
decision would affect only one mode of production (e.g., natural gas). A consequential
LCA would aim at first identifying and using the marginal mode of electricity produc-
tion in a growing market (e.g., gas power plants could be built in Europe if electricity
demand increases) or in a shrinking market (e.g., coal power plants could be shut down
if demand decreases), with the risk that the marginal technology could be misidentified
(e.g., when using a general equilibrium model in a rapidly changing world).
    As discussed by Zamagni et al. (2012) and Suh and Yang (2014), both approaches
have various strengths and weaknesses and still tend to overlap in LCA applications.
In this book, we will help the reader to pragmatically consider the question raised by
Suh and Yang (2014, p. 1183): “How can a model, or a combination of models, best
be used to answer a question recognizing both strengths and weaknesses of different
modeling frameworks and available data?”
26                                                        Environmental Life Cycle Assessment


3.2 SYSTEM FUNCTION
Once the goal of a comparative study is defined, various systems or products must
be compared based on a common function. Scenarios, which represent the different
alternatives, are chosen to satisfy the same function. This system function needs a
clear definition, because it is the basis for determining two essential LCA elements:
the functional unit (Section 3.3) and the system boundaries (Sections 3.4 and 3.5). To
most objectively consider each alternative, the function should be determined before
defining the FU or the system boundaries.
    It is not always easy to select one exact function of a system, because a single
product can have multiple functions. In such a case, the main function and the sec-
ondary functions should be identified (see examples in Table 3.1). The primary func-
tion, by definition, is common to the different alternatives. The secondary functions
are specific to each scenario, and if they differ greatly between alternatives, they can
reveal bias in the comparison. For example, one might try to compare a pair of boots
with a pair of sandals, because they both meet a primary function of protecting the
feet. However, the boots additionally protect the feet from cold; thus, a direct com-
parison of the two types of shoes is not generally useful.
    When a component of a larger system is studied, the function chosen is generally that
of the whole system. For example, although the main function of a car door is to provide
access to the vehicle and passenger protection, it only becomes effective when the vehicle
is used to transport passengers. Thus, a more meaningful function is to provide access
and protection for the transportation of passengers over the car’s lifespan. In this way,
the LCA would consider not only the impacts related to door manufacturing, but also
the influence of the weight of the car door on subsequent fuel consumption during use.

     When reviewing an LCA, the system function must be checked for validity in all
     scenarios, making explicit any differences between scenarios. Particular atten-
     tion should be given when secondary functions of alternative scenarios differ.



     TABLE 3.1
     Primary and Secondary Functions of Some Sample Products
     Product                Primary Function                        Secondary Functions
     Pair of shoes   Protect feet                         Protection from weather
                                                          Protection from cold
                                                          Social stature
     Restaurant      Serve meals                          Socializing
                                                          Heated space
     Car door        Help to ensure safe use of the car   Protection from theft
                                                          Safety in case of accident
                                                          Sealing the car shut
     Potato          Food for humans, animal feed, or     Maintenance of arable land
                      raw material (starch)               Protection of the landscape and environment
Goal and System Definition                                                             27


3.3 FUNCTIONAL UNIT AND REFERENCE FLOW
3.3.1 Definitions
Once the system function is determined, the functional unit (FU) can be defined.

   According to ISO 14044 (2006), the FU is the “quantified performance of a
   product system for use as a reference unit.” This measure quantifies the func-
   tion of a system in terms of the service offered. The FU is the same for all
   scenarios, with inventory flows and impacts for each scenario calculated per
   FU (Chapters 4 and 5). For example, different transportation methods are often
   compared based on a FU of transporting one person over a distance of 1 km
   (i.e., 1 person-km).


    The FU is not a ratio and must be quantifiable and additive, such that the impact
of two FUs is double that of one FU. The FU for assessing one component of a larger
system is based on the FU of the system as a whole, analogous to the choice of a
system function described in the previous section. Thus, the FU for a car door can
be one car door ensuring access and safety during the transportation of a person over
1 km.
    For a given FU, the reference flows are the amounts of goods or services purchased
to fulfill the function and generate this FU. In the case of transporting 1 person-km,
key reference flows include (a) the gasoline used for 1 vehicle-km divided by the
number of passengers and (b) the fraction of a vehicle needed to transport one person
over 1 km (i.e., one divided by the number of person-kilometers transported over
the vehicle’s lifespan). These reference flows usually vary among scenarios, and are
discussed in greater detail in Section 3.4.1.
    Table 3.2 presents examples of FUs and reference flows. In the shoe example, the
FU is chosen to be one pair of shoes in good condition for 1 year (the time period
is arbitrary, but must remain consistent). Thus, in the case of high-quality shoes
that last 2 years, only half a pair of shoes needs to be purchased per year to satisfy
this FU (i.e., one pair every 2 years). For lower-quality shoes with a life span of six
months, two pairs of shoes must be purchased to be able to wear a suitable pair of
shoes for 1 year. In this example, the effective lifetime of the shoes has a direct effect
on the reference flows.
    In the case of hand-drying with a paper towel or an electric hand-dryer, the FU
selected is one pair of dried hands. Since doubling this number simply doubles all
corresponding reference flows in all scenarios, the chosen number of pairs of hands
is arbitrary but must be consistent among scenarios and explicitly defined. In these
two scenarios, the main reference flow needed to dry a pair of hands is either an
average of 1.5 paper towels or a consumption of 30 s of electric hand-drying (at a
power of 1800 W, this consumes 15 Wh of electricity). The reference flows must also
include a fraction of the towel dispenser and of the hand-drying devices. Assuming
the paper towel dispenser is operational for about 10 years, with 50 uses per day, it
dries about 182,625 hands; thus, 1/182,625 of a holder is required for one pair of
28                                                     Environmental Life Cycle Assessment



TABLE 3.2
Sample Functional Units and Reference Flows for Various Scenarios
                 Functional Unit          Reference Flows (What is            Key Parameters (Linking
System          (Service Offered)                Purchased)                   Reference Flows to FU)
Pair of shoes   1 pair of functional   0.5 pair of high-quality shoes         Lifetime of shoe
                 shoes for 1 year       (2 year lifespan)
                                       2 pairs of low-quality shoes
                                        (6 month lifespan)
Hand-dryer      1 pair of dried        1.5 paper towels                       Number of towels per
                 hands                 1/182,625th paper towel dispenser       usage
                                       1800 W for 30 s                        Power of dryer and
                                       1/365,250th electric dryer              duration of use
Wall paint      100 m2 of wall         30 kg of long-lasting paint that       Amount of paint applied
                 painted for            lasts 20 year                          per square meter
                 20 year               2 × 25 kg of less durable paint that   Lifetime of paint
                                        lasts 10 year



dried hands. Assuming the electric hand-dryer is operational for 20 years, with the
same frequency of use, 1/365,250 of a dryer is required per pair of hands.
   The parameters relating reference flows to the FU can often be identified as key
parameters directly affecting environmental impacts (Table 3.2), such as the number
of towels per usage in the hand-drying example. In the electric-dryer scenario, the
amount of electricity per usage is key, expressed in more tangible parameters as the
power use and duration of use. For such products where the use dominates impacts,
the product efficiency plays a dominant role. In applications where the manufactur-
ing or disposal stages have the dominant impact, such as for a shoe, which requires
no energy during use, the product lifetime and amount of material used often play
an essential role, as does the number of uses. Doubling the lifetime of such a product
cuts its emissions almost in half.
   Key parameters often measure environmental performance as ratios of material
needed per function, whereas the FU itself is additive and not a ratio (when the FU
doubles, so do the impacts).

     To summarize, a meaningful comparison among systems or scenarios must all
     be based on the same function characterized by the same (FU). The reference
     flows for each scenario represent the amounts of goods or services purchased
     per FU and constitute the basis for establishing the environmental inventory.


3.3.2 Critical Choice of a Functional Unit: Popcorn as a
       Packaging Material
To show the importance of choosing the right FU, we describe a study comparing various
packing materials (Jolliet et al. 1994). Plastic packaging materials (such as polystyrene
Goal and System Definition                                                                                                 29


peanuts) are traditionally used for economic and technological reasons, despite being
nonbiodegradable and produced from nonrenewable raw materials (oil). Various renew-
able and biodegradable materials have been proposed as alternatives, including pop-
corn, an “all-natural” option that feels greener. Even if the ethical issue of using food as
industrial raw material is still controversial, is popcorn preferable over polystyrene from
an environmental perspective? Answering such questions is the role of LCA.
   Figure 3.1a compares the environmental impacts of polystyrene and popcorn
by mass, showing that polystyrene results in three to four times more impacts per

                                                            Impacts per kg material
                                     100
                                                                                                              Phosphates
                                     90
                                                                                                              Nitrates
    Environmental impact (% of PS)




                                     80
                                                                                                              NH3
                                     70
                                                                                                              SO2
                                     60
                                                                                                              NOx
                                     50
                                                                                                              HC
                                     40
                                                                                                              CO
                                     30
                                     20                                                                       PM

                                     10                                                                       N2O

                                      0                                                                       CO2
                                            PS       PC           PS        PC             PS       PC
      (a)                                  Eco-factors 97       Critical volumes      Critical surface-time

                                                            Impacts per m3 material
                                     200                                                                      Phosphates
                                     180                                                                      Nitrates
    Environmental impact (% of PS)




                                     160
                                                                                                              NH3
                                     140
                                                                                                              SO2
                                     120
                                                                                                              NOx
                                     100
                                                                                                              HC
                                     80
                                                                                                              CO
                                     60
                                                                                                              PM
                                     40
                                     20                                                                       N2O

                                      0                                                                       CO2
                                            PS       PC           PS        PC             PS       PC
     (b)                                   Eco-factors 97       Critical volumes      Critical surface-time


FIGURE 3.1 Comparison of total environmental impacts due to filling a package with poly-
styrene peanuts (PS) or popcorn (PC) (a) per mass of material and (b) per volume. Impacts
of pollutant emissions were characterized and weighted based on three impact assessment
methods (as discussed in Chapter 5), where the lower impacts correspond to the more envi-
ronmentally friendly option. Representation (b) is relevant to the function of filling a package.
Substance abbreviations are defined at the front of the book. (Adapted from Jolliet, O., et al.,
Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment, 49, 253–266, 1994.)
30                                               Environmental Life Cycle Assessment


kilogram than popcorn (relative impacts vary slightly depending on the impact
assessment method). This analysis may suggest that popcorn is the more environ-
mentally friendly alternative.
    However, mass is not the relevant quantity for the function at hand, which is the
filling of cardboard to ensure safe transit. Thus, a suitable FU is the filling of one unit
of volume, with reference flows corresponding to the mass needed to achieve this.
Since popcorn is 4.6 times denser than polystyrene peanuts, the resulting compara-
tive impacts per FU of volume (Figure 3.1b) are reversed relative to the impacts per
mass.
    The key parameter determining the differences in environmental impacts between
polystyrene and popcorn is not primarily the nitrate leaching or fertilizer use from
growing the corn, but rather the density of the popcorn. Reducing nitrate leaching and
fertilizer use can slightly reduce the impacts of popcorn, but a reduction in density
is necessary to make any substantial improvement over polystyrene packaging. This
leads to what some may consider a surprising result: the industrial non-natural prod-
uct (polystyrene) is more environmentally friendly. The concept of “natural” is not
necessarily consistent with that of “environmentally friendly”! This density reduction
is now achieved industrially by extracting the corn starch and expanding it in a man-
ner similar to that for polystyrene or by using plastic bags filled with air.
    Another common key factor is the reuse of materials. For example, assuming that
the popcorn is used once on average, compared with the polystyrene peanut, which
is used twice, the polystyrene emissions and subsequent impacts should be halved
for each FU (i.e., only half the impacts are allocated to each use). This would further
enhance the advantage in this study of using polystyrene.

3.3.3 Electric Light Bulbs: Setting Up the Life Cycle Assessment
The comparison of two light bulbs illustrates how to identify the FU, the reference
flows, and the key environmental parameters (Table 3.3), along with how this can
inform product design from the beginning (Section 7.3.2). This example will be
referred to throughout the book.
    The main function of most light bulbs is, of course, to illuminate; thus, the FU
must account for a reference amount of visible light, or luminous flux, chosen here
to be 800 lm. The FU must also specify a reference duration of illumination, chosen
here to be 5000 h. The secondary functions, such as heating, creating a pleasant
atmosphere, and being fashionable, can vary according to the bulb type, but are
not addressed by the FU and could be considered as complementary performances.
The reference flows purchased to fulfill the FU of 800 lm over 5000 h include one
fluorescent bulb or five incandescent bulbs (as the latter’s service life is only 1000 h).
This adds up to 5 × 35 g = 175 g of materials for the incandescent light bulbs and
160 g (one bulb) of materials for the fluorescent bulb. Electricity consumption must
also be purchased, with 60 W × 5000 h = 300 kWh for the incandescent bulbs, and
13 W × 5000 h = 65 kWh for the fluorescent one. The key environmental parameters
can now be identified as ratios that relate the FU to the reference flows. For the
use stage, the key environmental parameter is the luminous efficacy, which is how
efficiently the bulb produces visible light, expressed in lumens per watt (LPW). The
Goal and System Definition                                                                      31



TABLE 3.3
Function and Functional Unit for Different Light Bulbs
                    Main
Products          Function          Secondary Functions
Scenario 1:     Illumination     Heat
 Incandescent                    Security
Scenario 2:                      Ambience/style
 Fluorescent

Product or        Functional      Reference flow (what is     Key environmental parameters
system           unit (service           bought)                (linking reference flows to
                   offered)                                           functional unit)

Scenario 1:                      60 W × 5000 h/FU = 300      Lumens per watt (use stage)
 Incandescent                    kWh/FU                      Bulb lifespan (manufacturing
 bulbs          800 lumens for   5 bulbs (=5 × 35 g = 175 g) stage)
                 a duration of
Scenario 2:      5000 h          13 W × 5000 h/FU = 65       Amount and type of materials per
 Fluorescent                     kWh/FU                      bulb (material extraction and
 bulbs                           1 bulb (160 g)              manufacturing stages)



key parameters of bulb service life and materials are more relevant to the manu-
facturing stage. Of course, designers generally aim to maximize luminous efficacy
and lifespan while minimizing materials, but outlining the FU and reference flows
helps to quantify and prioritize the various parameters and may also identify less
obvious parameters. The subsequent LCA stages more clearly quantify the relative
importance of these key parameters, as well as the impacts caused by toxic substance
emissions. Section 4.2.2 presents the next step of detailing energy and CO2 balances
for this case study.

3.3.4 Functional Unit and Reference Flows: A Common
       Basis for Both Environmental and Cost Analyses
In addition to estimating the environmental impacts of existing products and provid-
ing information to guide the design of new products, the FU and reference flows can
also be used to estimate costs over the whole life cycle of the product. This process
of life cycle costing (LCC) is not technically part of the environmentally focused
LCA, but since it uses life cycle thinking and the same framework and concepts, the
two are easily combined. A short LCC example is given in the next subsection, with
further details in Chapter 6.

3.3.4.1 Electric Light Bulbs: Life Cycle Costs
A fluorescent light bulb is generally more expensive than an incandescent one at
purchase, but a fluorescent bulb lasts longer and saves electricity and thus money.
Since the reference flows represent what must be purchased to achieve the FU, it
32                                                Environmental Life Cycle Assessment



TABLE 3.4
Analysis of Life Cycle Costs for the Light Bulb Example
                       Functional Unit     Reference Flow
Product or System     (Service Offered)   (What Is Bought)           Life Cycle Cost
Scenario 1:                               300 kWh/FU         300 kWh/FU × $0.1/kWh = $30/FU
 Incandescent bulbs                       5 bulbs            5 × $1.5 = $7.5/FU
                      800 lm for a
                                                             Total = $37.5/FU
                       duration of
Scenario 2:                               65 kWh/FU          65 kWh/FU × $0.1/kWh = $6.5/FU
                       5000 h
 Fluorescent bulbs                        1 bulb             1 × $8 = $8/FU
                                                             Total = $14.5/FU



is only logical to use them as a starting point in LCC (Table 3.4 and Section 6.8.1).
To provide the service of 800 lm for 5000 h, the five incandescent bulbs cost $7.50/FU,
compared with $8/FU for one low-energy fluorescent bulb. Even at a competitive
rate of $0.1/kWh, the cost of electricity during the use stage comes to $30/FU for the
incandescent bulbs and $6.5/FU for the fluorescent bulbs. Thus, despite their higher
retail price, fluorescent bulbs generate significant savings of approximately $23 per
bulb over the course of 5000 h or 5 years.
    The results of these environmental and cost comparisons are thus ideal, where
the fluorescent bulbs are better from both an energetic and economic point of view.
Because of this, the sale of incandescent bulbs has recently been phased out in many
countries. Why, then, do people continue to purchase incandescent bulbs that con-
sume more energy and end up costing more than fluorescent bulbs? Incandescent
bulbs are not fully socially accepted for a variety of reasons. First, a higher initial
cost is a barrier, emphasizing the importance of information on future benefits when
purchasing the product. Also, fluorescent bulbs can take up to a minute to reach full
brightness after being turned on, which can be partially compensated by purchas-
ing a bulb with higher luminous intensity (i.e., a compact fluorescent lamp [CFL]
of 1100 lm at 18 W can replace an incandescent bulb of 800 lm at 60 W) or by
purchasing the even more energy-efficient light-emitting diode (LED) bulbs. These
behavioral factors illustrate the importance of the social dimension in the following
statement by the Food and Agriculture Organization: “sustainable development …
is environmentally non-degrading, technically appropriate, economically viable and
socially acceptable” (FAO 1995).

     To summarize, the FU and reference flows are a starting point for two comple-
     mentary tools: environmental LCA and LCC.


3.3.5 Multifunctional Products
When comparing products or services, if their functions are close but not identical,
it is important to clearly indicate this and evaluate the potential consequences on the
study results.
Goal and System Definition                                                                                 33


   Functions may differ in the performance of the product or service. When compar-
ing environmental impacts of different modes of transport (rail, road, and air), the
time to travel a given distance can vary greatly, yet this travel time cannot be directly
included in the FU. Still, as is done with economic performance, this technical per-
formance can be measured and compared with the environmental performance in
the final interpretation phase.
   In cases where the multifunctional aspect changes the necessary reference flows,
the FU can be adjusted to account for this. This adjustment approach is practically
identical to that used for allocating emissions to coproducts, using the same hierar-
chy of methods applied in Section 4.5.
   There are some systems which simultaneously achieve many different functions,
in which case the function chosen for analysis is important to identify. For example,
the system of wheat crop production (Charles et al. 2006) can have many functions:
landscape upkeep, basic wheat production, or production of quality wheat for bread
making. For landscape upkeep, the FU is 1 ha, with environmental impacts reported
per unit of surface area. For wheat production as the function, the FU is 1 t of pro-
duced grains. Bread making implies not only a given quantity of flour but also a min-
imal protein content of 13%; thus, the FU is 1 t of grains with a 13% protein content.
   Different choices of system function can yield different environmental impact
rankings between scenarios. Figure 3.2 shows that choice of system function can
actually reverse the ranking of nonrenewable primary energy consumption in wheat
production systems for different fertilization levels. For example, the low fertiliza-
tion intensity option is energetically favorable for landscape upkeep, but it is the
most energy-intensive option when growing bread-quality wheat. This is because
low fertilization reduces both yield and protein content, necessitating the use of a

                                              200
                                              180
                Nonrenewable primary energy




                                              160
                 (% of 100 kgN/ha scemario)




                                              140
                                              120
                                              100
                                               80
                                               60
                                                              per hectare
                                               40             per ton
                                               20             per ton, 13% protein
                                                0
                                                    60     100        140         180        220     260
                                                         Nitrogen fertilization intensity (kgN/ha)


FIGURE 3.2 Consumption of nonrenewable primary energy necessary for wheat produc-
tion as a function of nitrogen fertilization intensities for three different functional units: per
surface area (hectare), per mass of wheat (ton), and per mass of bread-quality wheat (ton,
13% protein). (Adapted from Charles, R., et al. Agriculture Ecosystems & Environment, 113,
216–225, 2006.)
34                                               Environmental Life Cycle Assessment


high-protein wheat variety that leads to a further reduction in yield and thus higher
impacts per unit mass of bread with a 13% protein content.

3.4 SYSTEM DEFINITION
3.4.1 Principles of System Modeling
The reference flows and subsequent impacts for each FU are calculated based on a
well-defined system. System modeling is based on a holistic approach that provides a
global understanding of the system by considering it as a whole, in all of its dynamics
and complexity (Le Moigne 1990). The system is more than the sum of its elements.
The system modeling approach focuses on the relationships between elements that
make up the system rather than the elements themselves. The system is then described
in terms of these relationships and their significance to the function of the system. In
LCA, the world can be schematically decomposed into the environment, the system
providing a product or function, and the rest of the economic activity (Figure 3.3).
    The system here is defined as a group of dynamically interacting elements, orga-
nized to achieve one or more functions. It is identified by the elements it contains, called
processes, the links between these elements, and the boundaries that delineate it from
the surroundings (environment plus economy). The inputs of the environment into the
system are the extracted resources, which include the energy and the land used; the out-
puts of the system into the environment are emissions to air, water, and soil. The output
of the system into the economic world is the service provided by the product.
    The assessed and modeled system is built by linking different process modules.
The processes and elements required to fulfill the function are identified, and these
are expressed as a series of unit processes (Figure 3.4), the smallest elements in
the analysis, for each of which inputs and outputs are quantified. Unit processes are
linked to one another within the system by intermediary flows, expressing the quan-
tity of each unit process needed for the subsequent unit process. The outputted prod-
uct flows to the economy are any products that leave the system. Unit processes are
linked to the environment by elementary flows, with input elementary flows corre-
sponding to the use of natural resources, such as extracted raw material, energy, and
land use. Elementary flows exiting a unit process are emissions to water, air, or soil.


                        Economy                      Environment


                                                Resource extraction
                  Product                       (minerals, land, water, etc.)
                                Assessed
                 Input = 0       system         Emission (to air, water and
                                                soil; of substances, noise, etc.)



                             System boundary


FIGURE 3.3 Relationships and exchanges between the studied system, the economic world,
and the environment.
Goal and System Definition                                                                                        35




                                                   Unit process


                                                          Intermediary
                                                          product flow

        Input elementary flows                     Unit process          Exiting elementary flows
         (extractions from the                                               (emissions to the
             environment)                                                      environment)
                                                          Intermediary
                                                          product flow

                                                   Unit process




FIGURE 3.4 Example of a set of unit processes in a system. (After ISO, ISO 14040
Environmental Management—Life Cycle Assessment—Principles and Framework, 2006.)


                                                                         Benzo[a]pyrene 1.30 mg
                     Aluminum oxide 1.92 kg                              Carbon dioxide, fossil 1.50 kg
      Anode, aluminum electrolysis 0.448 kg                              Carbon monoxide, biogenic 91.7 g

   Cathode, aluminum electrolysis 0.0181 kg                              Hydrogen fluoride 539 mg
                                                        Aluminum,        Nitrogen oxides 63.9 mg
  Aluminum electrolysis plant 1.54 × 10–10 p             primary,
                                                          liquid         PAH 45.7 mg
Electricity mix, aluminum industry 15.9 kWh                1 kg          Particulates, < 2.5 μm 2.61 g
                  Heat, light fuel oil 0.089 MJ                          Sulfur dioxide 8.83 g
                   Heat, natural gas 0.084 MJ                            Heat, waste 56.0 MJ
    Transport, transoceanic freight ship 3.8 tkm                         Disposal, filter dust Al electrolysis 2.00 g
                                                                         Disposal, red mud from bauxite
                                                                         digestion 1.36 kg


FIGURE 3.5 Unit process flows associated with liquid primary aluminum at plant, ecoin-
vent 2.2. Elementary flows from and to the environment are shown in italics.


   Figure 3.5 presents the intermediary and elementary flows of primary liquid
aluminum, as described in ecoinvent 2.2. The manufacturing of liquid aluminum
makes use of the following intermediary flows: aluminum oxide, electricity and
quantities of anode and cathode for electrolysis, and heat produced by burning light
fuel oil and natural gas. It also involves transoceanic freight and treatment of wastes
from aluminum production. Direct air emissions during liquid aluminum manu-
facturing results in some of the following elementary flows: benzo[a]pyrene and
other polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon emissions, carbon dioxide and chlorofluo-
rocarbon-14 (CFC-14), sulfur dioxide, nitrogen oxides, and PM2.5, as well as waste
heat. Each of the intermediary flows requires other intermediary flows and generates
36                                                        Environmental Life Cycle Assessment


                                   Disposal, red mud from          Disposal, filter dust
                                      bauxite digestion              Al electrolysis
                                           1.36 kg                       2.00 g



                                                        Aluminum,
                                                       primary, liquid
                                                           1 kg



               Aluminum oxide        Anode, aluminum           Cathode, aluminum           Electricity mix
                                       electrolysis                electrolysis
                     1.93 kg             0.449 kg                   0.0181 kg                 57.4 MJ



         Aluminum                     Petroleum coke
         hydroxide
          2.96 kg                         0.292 kg



         Bauxite               Heat, light fuel              Transport,                     Natural gas
                                     oil                 transoceanic freight
         4.14 kg                  14.9 MJ                     34.1 tkm                        3.19 MJ


FIGURE 3.6 Flowchart for the manufacturing of liquid primary aluminum at plant, based
on ecoinvent 2.2.


additional direct emissions. For example, the manufacturing of aluminum oxide will
itself use aluminum hydroxide, as well as additional electricity and heat from light
fuel oil and natural gas, and will generate some more waste heat.
    The level of detail required in modeling a unit process depends on the objectives
of the study. Each unit process can be further subdivided into other unit processes
down to the level of necessary detail (Figure 3.6). Since this is a physical system,
mass and energy balances can be carried out to check that unit processes and the
global system respect conservation of mass and energy (see example in Figure 8.3).
    The theoretically ideal system is one defined such that the economic world has no
inputs to the system and only one output from the system, namely the product cor-
responding to the studied function (Figure 3.3). All processes required to fulfill the
system function should be part of the system. In practice, this is often not possible,
either because of a lack of data or time to carry out the LCA. Moreover, the system
may have outputs other than the studied product, resulting in coproducts of value to
which a portion of the emissions must be allocated (Section 4.5).

3.4.2 Flowchart
The flowchart or flow diagram or process tree (such as the one depicted in Figure 3.6)
provides a clear overview of the processes and their relationships. It depicts each unit
process considered within the system and quantifies the intermediary flows linking
these unit processes. The flow diagram is built starting from the reference flows
Goal and System Definition                                                          37


(what you need to buy for one FU), then identifying the first-tier intermediary flows
(quantities of preceding unit processes) associated with each reference flow. The
operation is then repeated, starting from the Tier 1 intermediary flow, yielding a
second set of Tier 2 elementary flows. In practice, for a new study, the flow diagram
will display all linkages from reference flows up to existing database unit processes,
whose upstream and downstream links are described in further detail in the database
itself and therefore do not necessarily need to be shown in the flowchart. Figure 3.6
presents the flowchart for liquid aluminum production. With the goal of displaying
all key unit processes, the system boundaries also include the upstream Tier 2 pro-
cesses, such as aluminum hydroxide.

3.4.3 Description of Scenarios
Each scenario being compared in the LCA must have its own flowchart to be prop-
erly visualized and broken down into unit modules. Each scenario must cover the
same functional reality and yield the same FU, which means having the same pri-
mary function. Of course, scenarios may share certain unit processes, as described
in a case study in Chapter 8 (Figure 8.1).


3.5 SYSTEM BOUNDARIES
3.5.1 Principles of System Boundaries
The system boundaries determine which specific modules are included and excluded
when modeling the system. They are defined to ideally include all the required
processes, from cradle to grave, to fulfill the function. This may sound simple, but
quickly becomes complicated in actual applications.
   A complete LCA would require coverage and modeling of all global production
processes occurring at any point in the production, use, or disposal chain. In
agricultural production, for example, an LCA should account for emissions from
the use of a tractor, but is it necessary to consider the emissions associated with
manufacturing the tractor, or associated with making the machinery that helped
to manufacture the tractor? For the LCAs described thus far, based on sets of
processes, it is important to determine the criteria for the inclusion or exclusion
of certain processes and apply them according to ISO 14000 standards. This sec-
tion first describes the main types of processes to consider, and then presents an
example to describe how consistency rules are defined to best determine system
boundaries.
   Note that the input–output method of LCA avoids many of these issues associ-
ated with cutting off the supply chain, with advantages and disadvantages discussed
further in Section 4.4.4.

   According to ISO 14044, the system boundary is the “set of criteria specifying
   which unit processes are part of a product system” (p. 5).
38                                               Environmental Life Cycle Assessment


                                                     Infrastructure,
                                                         inputs,
                                                     transportation



                                                     Manufacturing                Recycling
                       Raw materials and
                          energy ores
     Resources
                           extraction
                         and refining
                                                            Use                 Reuse


                                                          Waste
                                                        treatment

                   System boundary
                                                Emissions to air, water, soil


FIGURE 3.7 Flowchart of major processes and stages in the life cycle of a product.

3.5.2 Main Considered Processes
Starting from the reference flows, the system should include all flows required
to fulfill the function and cover the main life cycle stages (ISO 14040, p. 12 and
Figure 3.7):

     •   Extraction and refining of raw materials and energy
     •   Provision of infrastructure, machinery, inputs, and transport
     •   Main manufacturing stage
     •   Use stage, including maintenance
     •   Waste treatment, taking into account the recovery of used products (including
         reuse, recycling, and energy recovery)

   Since eliminating waste generates emissions, waste treatment must be included
within the system boundaries. Waste flows (e.g., kilograms of anode waste sent to a
landfill) are intermediary flows rather than elementary ones and, therefore, should
not be reported in the inventory as such. It is the emissions and other elementary
flows associated with the waste treatment stages (e.g., kilograms of aluminum emit-
ted to ground and surface water) that are reported in the inventory.

3.5.3 Importance of System Boundaries: Comparing a
       Fast-Food and a Traditional Restaurant
An LCA study compared a fast-food restaurant with a traditional one in the early
1990s. The results obtained (Figure 3.8) indicate that the fast-food restaurant con-
sumed six times less energy and seven times less water, and produced five times less
waste per customer.
Goal and System Definition                                                           39


                                        2




                  (kWh/customer)
                                      1.5




                     Energy
                                        1
                                      0.5
                                        0
                                            Fast food   Traditional
                   (a)                                  restaurant
                  Water consumption



                                       20
                    (L/customer)



                                       15
                                       10
                                        5
                                        0
                                            Fast food   Traditional
                   (b)                                  restaurant

                                      100
                  (g/customer)




                                       75
                     Waste




                                       50
                                       25
                                        0
                                            Fast food   Traditional
                   (c)                                  restaurant


FIGURE 3.8 Initial results comparing the impacts of a fast-food restaurant with a tradi-
tional restaurant: (a) energy, (b) water, (c) waste.



    Faced with these rather surprising results, the considered system boundaries and
other assumptions underlying this study should be closely examined. Table 3.5 lists
the main life cycle stages for each scenario, including those that were not considered
in the original study. Can you see some of the flaws of this study?
    The first flaw with this study is that the system boundaries are chosen as the walls
of the restaurant, only accounting for the processes that occur within the restau-
rant. This is a physical rather than functional basis for a system boundary, and thus
excludes initial food preparation and packaging from the fast-food system. Moreover,
the dish production and waste management also occur outside the restaurant and are
not included for either system, thus preventing a comparison of their differences.
These excluded processes are generally unfavorable to fast-food restaurants and
therefore falsely bias the study. A second criticism of this work is that the function
of a fast-food restaurant is different from that of a traditional one, which offers more
space to customers to linger (Table 3.1).
    The study described was repeated by Lang et al. (1994), who addressed these
key criticisms. To compare two restaurants with the same function, the first fast-
food restaurant (FF1), using all disposable dishes, was compared with a restaurant
of the same style in which cutlery is washed and reused (FF2). Moreover, the system
40                                                      Environmental Life Cycle Assessment



  TABLE 3.5
  Comparison of Food Preparation Steps for Fast-Food and Traditional
  Restaurants
  Fast-Food Restaurant                                          Traditional Restaurant
  Agricultural production chain                   Agricultural production chain (same as fast-food)
  Transport                                       Transport (same)
  Production chain for plastic tableware          Production chain for reusable dishes
   (knives, forks, cups, etc.)
  Initial preparation and packaging of food
   (preparation of burgers, salads, etc.)         Preparation of food and cooking
    Final cooking
  Cleaning, heating, and lighting of restaurant   Cleaning, heating, and lighting of restaurant (same)
                                                  Clean reusable dishes
  Management of packaging and food waste
                                                  Management of food and packaging waste

  Note: Items in italic were not included in the system boundary of the original study.



boundaries were chosen to account for all the processes needed to achieve equivalent
functions (Figure 3.9), thus accounting for dishwashing and waste treatment. Finally,
the number of meals served at FF1 was recounted and revised to a lower value than
in the original study.
    For these more consistent system boundaries, Figure 3.10 shows the environmen-
tal impact comparison obtained by Lang et al. (1994). Using the Ecoscarcity method
to aggregate different impacts (see Section 5.5.5), the environmental load due to FF1
is about twice that of FF2. Therefore, the corrected system boundaries and compari-
son between similar functions (along with improved data for FF1) reverse the results
of the flawed original study, finding that the fast-food restaurant with reusable dishes
is more environmentally friendly.

3.5.4 Rules to Define System Boundaries
The example in the previous subsection illustrates the need to identify rules for
consistency when defining system boundaries, to provide a framework that helps to
reveal and avoid errors.

     Rule 1 The system boundaries must cover the same functional reality in all
     scenarios.


   The first study, comparing the fast-food with the traditional restaurant, had two
system boundaries that clearly did not cover the same reality, including all food prep-
aration and dishwashing for the traditional scenario without including analogous
processes for the fast-food one. The system boundaries are not physical boundaries,
but functional ones.
Goal and System Definition                                                                  41


                                                    System boundary

       Raw material extraction       Water treatment                   Energy supply


             Materials                   Water                            Energy




           Production                Transport                        Restaurant

               Food                     Food                      Food          Heating
                                                               preparation
                                                                               Lighting
              Dishes                   Dishes                                 Ventilation
                                                                                Cooling
                                                                 Dish
                                                                washing        Cleaning
            Packaging                 Packaging




            Used water                                                    Waste


       Wastewater treatment                                           Waste treatment


             Effluents                                                   Landfills



               Water                          Air                            Soil




  Legend                                 Intermediary               Excluded from system
                      Process
                                           product

                                 Water flow            Other flow


FIGURE 3.9 System boundary to compare environmental impacts of two fast-food restau-
rants. (After Lang, B., et al., GAIA, 3, 108–115, 1994.)




  Rule 2 Cut-off criteria for the inclusion of processes in the system boundary
  must be clearly described, including assumptions, reasoning, and effects on
  study results. Processes should only be excluded if they contribute less than the
  cut-off percentages (e.g., 1%) to the mass of the product, the energy consump-
  tion of the system, or the environmental impacts (e.g., emissions of a given
  pollutant) (ISO 14044, 2006). These cut-off criteria are fixed in advance.
42                                                        Environmental Life Cycle Assessment


                                           50,000
                                           45,000                           Transport

           Ecopoint per customer per day   40,000                           Dishes
                                           35,000
                                                                            Secondary
                                           30,000                           packaging
                                           25,000                           Use

                                           20,000
                                           15,000
                                           10,000
                                            5,000
                                               0
                                                    FF1            FF2


FIGURE 3.10 Comparison of environmental impacts (in ecopoint) per customer served in
fast-food restaurants FF1 and FF2. (After Lang, B., et al., GAIA, 3, 108–115, 1994.)



   This rule is consistent with the iterative process of LCA, in which a preliminary
assessment (screening) is conducted over all phases (inventory, impact assessment,
and interpretation) to determine the order of magnitude of different contributions.
The subsequent detailed analysis further examines the processes that exceed the cut-
off criteria. Because of the array of LCA modules and applications, it is not possible
to determine an overarching cut-off threshold that applies to all LCAs. In practice,
the cut-off criteria are applied as a minimum inclusion requirement, ensuring that all
processes contributing to more than the cut-off are included. All existing processes
available in databases or collected data on new processes are usually kept, even if
they contribute to less than the cut-off.

     Rule 3 Processes that are identical in the different scenarios can only be
     excluded if the reference and intermediary flows affected by these processes
     are strictly equal (i.e., the intermediary flows of each excluded process per FU
     are exactly the same for the different scenarios).


   In other words, the LCA must still account for identical processes occurring in all
scenarios if the scenarios require different quantities of processes.
   As an example, imagine comparing the use of two herbicides, A and B, for the
harvest of a given quantity of wheat. Clearly, the system boundaries must include the
processes of herbicide manufacturing and treatment. But, can we exclude the gaso-
line required for plowing the field and other wheat cultivation steps that must occur
in both scenarios? These steps are identical regardless of the herbicide and thus
appear unnecessary in the comparison (Figure 3.11).
   To answer this question, it is essential to consider the necessary intermediary
flows per FU rather than per other default quantities. Per hectare, it is true that the
Goal and System Definition                                                                         43


                                    Plowing                         Plowing
                                   20 L diesel                     20 L diesel


                                  Application                   Application
                                  Herbicide A                   Herbicide B
                               10 kg A, 5 L diesel          0.2 kg B, 2 L diesel


                                     Yield                           Yield
                                    5000 kg                         4000 kg


FIGURE 3.11 Treatment of a hectare of wheat with Herbicide A and Herbicide B.


same amount of diesel is used to plow a field of wheat. In these scenarios, however,
the yield per hectare is not identical between the scenarios, due to the differences
in the effectiveness of the herbicides. Thus, the tractor needs to plow a larger area
for Herbicide B to yield a given amount of wheat; the Herbicide B scenario requires
0.005 L of diesel per kilogram of wheat compared with 0.004 L for Herbicide A. In
other words, when the results are calculated per FU (per kilogram of wheat), emis-
sions per hectare plowed remain the same, but must be divided by different yields.
Since the herbicide affects the ultimate yield, it is not only the herbicide stage but all
wheat production stages that must be accounted for.
   A second example shows how seemingly identical stages of a product must still
be included in the system boundaries because of other product differences. A study
compared three kinds of toothpaste packaging (Haydock 1995): a standard tube in
cardboard packaging, a self-standing tube not needing the outer box, and a dos-
ing toothpaste pump. Although the type and amount of toothpaste considered in
each packaging was identical, the packaging influenced how much toothpaste was
ultimately discarded (Figure 3.12). More wasted toothpaste increases the effective


                      10
                       9
                       8                                                              Wasted
                       7                                                              toothpaste
        Energy (MJ)




                       6                                                              Packaging
                       5
                       4                                                              Toothpaste
                       3
                       2
                       1
                       0
                           Packaged tube      Self-standing tube        Dosing tube


FIGURE 3.12 Total energy requirements associated with the use of toothpaste and
its packaging. (From Haydock, R., SETAC Case Studies Symposium, 1995.)
44                                                   Environmental Life Cycle Assessment


energy used and the emissions associated with that packaging. Another effect of
packaging (not shown in Figure 3.12) is the influence of the tube opening on the
amount of toothpaste used per brushing. Therefore, the production energy and emis-
sions associated with toothpaste manufacturing should still be included in the system
boundaries to consider differences in waste, even if it is the packaging that is being
compared.

EXERCISES
Exercise 3.1: Paper or Plastic?
You want to decide whether to use a plastic or paper bag at the supermarket. The
plastic bag weighs 40 g with a capacity of 9 L, and you estimate you will use it twice
on average (reuse one additional time after the first use). The paper bag weighs 30 g
with a capacity of 6 L and cannot be reused. Use the forms AIV.2 and AIV.3 in
Appendix IV to

     a. Determine the FU, assuming the bags carry their maximum load.
     b. Determine the reference flows and key parameters linking the reference
        flows to the FU for the two scenarios, assuming manufacturing and dis-
        posal are negligible.

Exercise 3.2: Paper Towels or Hot-Air Dryer?
Use LCA to compare the use of paper towels in a public restroom with that of a
hot-air dryer. Many key assumptions and parameter values are provided as bullet
points and in Table 3.6. Use the forms IV.2 through IV.4 in Appendix IV to

     a. Describe the function and any secondary functions of the system.
     b. Choose an FU that represents the function of the system.
     c. For each case, list the reference flows and key parameters corresponding to
        the selected FU.
     d. System boundary.



              TABLE 3.6
              Table of Parameter Values for Exercise Comparing
              Hand-Drying Options
              Hot-Air Hand-Dryer                              Paper Towel
              Device carcass     8 kg cast iron   Dispenser weight     3 kg plastic
              Devise base        4 kg steel
              Device lifetime    20 year          Dispenser lifetime   10 year
              Electricity rate   1800 W           Paper towel weight   3.58 g
              Drying time        30 s
              Transport          100 km truck     Transport            100 km truck
Goal and System Definition                                                                                 45


    i. Starting from the FU and the reference flows, draw the flowchart and
       system boundary for each scenario; you may want to stop when you link
       to the process of an existing database.
   ii. For each scenario, find a secondary function that may save energy and
       draw it on the diagram.
  iii. Based on the masses of the various reference flows involved, decide
       whether the transportation of the paper towel dispenser should be
       included in the system boundary, and explain.
		 Assume the following:
    • Fifty uses per day for both scenarios.
    • The hot-air hand-dryer device is made out of cast iron. It is activated by
       a button that blows hot air for 30 s.
    • On average, 1.5 paper towels are used for each pair of hands.
    • Manufacturing energy for towels, towel dispenser, and air-dryer device
       are negligible.

Exercise 3.3: Elementary and Intermediary
Flows of 1 kg Aluminum Hydroxide
Based on Figure 3.13, determine the elementary and the intermediary flows related
to the production of 1 kg of aluminum hydroxide.


                                                                                 Key Environmental
Product or    Functional Unit                                                   Parameters (Linking
System        (Service Offered)           Reference Flow (What Is Bought)      Reference Flows to FU)
Scenario 1:                               60 W × 5000 h/FU = 300 kWh/FU        Lumens per watt (use stage)
 Incandescent                             5 bulbs (= 5 × 35 g = 175 g)         Bulb lifespan
 bulbs        800 lm for a                                                      (manufacturing stage)
Scenario 2:    duration of                13 W × 5000 h/FU = 65 kWh/FU         Amount and type of
 Fluorescent   5000 h                     1 bulb (160 g)                        materials per bulb
 bulbs                                                                          (material extraction and
                                                                                manufacturing stages)




                                                                            Heat, waste (0.503 MJ)
                  Water (1.05E–5 m3)
                                                                            Sodium, ion (1.28 g)
              Bauxite at mine (1.4 kg)
                                                      Aluminum
                                                      hydroxide,            Suspended solids (0.17 g)
          Electricity, medium voltage
                           (0.14 kWh)                    1 kg
                                                                            Total organic carbon (18 mg)
         Heat, light fuel oil (3.59 MJ)

  Transport, transoceanic freight ship                                      Red mud from bauxite digestion
                           (7.11 tkm)                                       (0.47 kg)



FIGURE 3.13 Unit process flows of aluminum hydroxide at plant, ecoinvent 2.2.
