      6        Interpretation

This chapter discusses interpretation, the fourth phase of an LCA. The majority of
interpretation is performed after goal definition, inventory, and impact assessment,
but should also be applied throughout each phase in an iterative process. This chap-
ter defines the interpretation principle and identifies its key points. Interpretation
is illustrated here with an example that compares a desktop computer to a laptop
computer. One section is devoted to quality control, followed by a section dedicated
to the calculation of uncertainties, an important topic that is still being developed
in LCA. This chapter also elaborates upon the social and economic perspectives of
LCA to create a more complete assessment.

6.1 INTERPRET! INTERPRET! INTERPRET!
The purpose of the interpretation phase is to identify the life cycle stages at which
intervention can substantially reduce the environmental impacts of the system or
product, as well as analyze the uncertainties involved. This LCA phase thus enables
the analyst to evaluate results, draw conclusions, explain the limitations of the study,
and make recommendations, all based on the results of the preceding inventory and
impact assessment phases. This phase should provide clear and usable information
for decision-making.
   To achieve these goals, the interpretation phase involves identification of critical
points in the life cycle (e.g., where much of the impact occurs), as well as assessment
of the quality and robustness of results using a series of checks (e.g., quality con-
trol, sensitivity analysis, and uncertainty analysis). The results from previous phases
must be combined with information on data quality, methodological choices (such as
allocation rules, limits of the system, and models used), value choices (which could
differ for the study and the analysis), and data from similar studies if they exist.
   LCA results requiring months of work are often only rapidly and superficially
interpreted. To avoid this misallocation of time, we recommend thorough interpreta-
tion at all possible levels as follows:

   • Interpretation must be conducted in a systematic way for each LCA phase,
     including after the goal and scope definition, after the inventory of pollutant
     emissions, after midpoint and damage characterization, and after the evalu-
     ation of overall impact. Interpretation is particularly useful for discussing
     and analyzing the results of the complete inventory before moving on to the
     impact assessment.
   • The contributions of each stage of the life cycle should be compared and
     analyzed, including extraction and preparation of raw materials, and energy,
     transportation, manufacturing, use, and disposal.


                                                                                    149
150                                            Environmental Life Cycle Assessment


   • The contributions of each system component should be reviewed, such as
     the CPU, monitor, keyboard, and computer peripherals when analyzing a
     computer.
   • Finally, the respective contributions of each pollutant and extracted sub-
     stance should be analyzed, identifying which emissions and extractions
     generate the most impact for each impact category.

6.2 IDENTIFICATION OF ACTION PRIORITIES
The goal of interpretation is to examine various ways of reducing environmental
impacts and then identify priorities for taking action. The inventory and impact
assessment results are used to identify key points of environmental impact, and
improvements are then identified to reduce resource consumption, energy demand,
or emissions (Heijungs et al. 1992).
    A first step is to focus on the life cycle stages and groups of processes that gen-
erate the greatest impact. However, the grouping of processes can be arbitrary and
depends on how the system is modeled. For example, the product’s manufacturing
stage may be divided into five substeps, whereas the use stage is often considered as
a single step. In such a case, each individual manufacturing substep appears small,
even if the stage as a whole is significant. One should be careful to include large sets
of individual processes that each appear to have small impacts but lead to substantial
impacts when summed.
    In the process of interpretation, we can also focus on life cycle stages that have
the highest potential to reduce impacts with limited investment. In some win-win
cases, both impacts and costs can be reduced at the same time. In other cases, even
a limited low-cost intervention can be extremely efficient in reducing impacts. For
example, changing uninsulated doors to well-insulated doors does not drastically
decrease impacts, but also may cost little enough to be a very efficient improvement
per unit area.
    The importance of interpretation is demonstrated by the common practice of
companies to study and invest in changes related to their own business operations,
even when most of the environmental impacts occur upstream or downstream from
these operations. Some agribusiness industries put 80% of environmental efforts into
production sites that represent only 20% of the impacts, without analyzing the other
80% of impacts that occur upstream or downstream of the production site. A com-
prehensive interpretation over the entire life cycle of the product enables companies
to improve their own operations as well as their upstream and downstream impacts.
    Interpretation also allows optimization of investment over the life cycle, based on
a cost–benefit analysis (Section 6.8.3).

6.3 INTERPRETATION EXAMPLE: DESKTOP
     VERSUS LAPTOP COMPUTER
To demonstrate how to apply interpretation throughout the LCA process, we discuss
the comparison of a desktop and a laptop computer. This example, used for instruc-
tional purposes, is based on the studies of Tekawa (1998) and Atlantic Consulting
Interpretation                                                                          151


(1998), and the data should not be used as a basis for new projects. These data are
then compared with the more recent, extensive, and reliable computer data from the
ecoinvent database.

6.3.1 Goal and Scope Definition
The comparison presented here is one meant to inform the development of a sustain-
able, ecofriendly computer, by performing a life cycle assessment of two different
types of PCs. The two studied scenarios are a desktop computer with a cathode ray
tube screen and a laptop with a liquid crystal display screen, where each is used for
10,000 hours (Table 6.1). It should be noted that the secondary functions of these
two computers are significantly different, with different key characteristics for each
computer in term of flexibility of use and adaptation ability. However, since a laptop
is often primarily used at a fixed location, it is considered in this study as a replace-
ment of a desktop computer.
    The considered function is the processing of information, and the functional
unit(FU) is a PC operating for 10,000 hours (Table 6.1).

6.3.1.1 Definition of System Boundaries
The system boundaries are defined to account for all processes that induce more than
2% of the total resource consumption (Figure 6.1). The infrastructure of the building
used to manufacture the computer is thus not taken into account. The disposal of the
laptop battery was not included in the initial study due to lack of data availability.

6.3.2 Inventory
The emissions inventory (Table 6.2) shows that the desktop computer has consis-
tently higher emissions and energy use than the laptop (by at least a factor of two).
The mass of CO2 emitted over the life cycle of the desktop computer is more than

TABLE 6.1
Functional Unit and Reference Flows for Computer Comparison
                                                                                 Key
Product or       Function/     Functional   Duration        Reference       Environmental
System            Service        Unit       of Service        Flows          Parameters
Scenario 1:   Information      1 PC with    2,000 h/     1 desktop with     Useful lifetime
 desktop PC    processing:      speed of     year over    cathode ray        (until it
              word              200 MHz;     5 years      tube screen        becomes
               processing,     medium                    160 W               obsolete)
               calculations,    usage                     electricity use   Electricity
Scenario 2:    drawing, etc.                             1 laptop with       consumption
 laptop PC                                                liquid crystal     rate
                                                          display screen
                                                         33 W electricity
                                                          use
152                                                   Environmental Life Cycle Assessment


                                       Resources


                                   Raw material and
                                 energy ores extraction
                                                                                Air, water,
                                                                                and soil
                                                                                emissions
        Infrastructure:
          Buildings,                 Manufacturing              Recycling
        administration,
              etc.
                                          Use                                   10,000
                                                                                hours of PC
                                                                                operation
                                    Waste treatment
                                                          System boundary


FIGURE 6.1 System boundary for personal computer comparison.



         TABLE 6.2
         Partial Emissions Inventory
                                                 Desktop (26 kg)        Laptop (3 kg)

         Resource Use
         Nonrenewable primary energy (MJ)             23,000                  8,500

         Emissions to Air (kg)
         CO2                                            860                    322
         CH4                                             1.9                   0.7
         HC                                              1.5                   0.6
         NOx                                             2.0                   0.7
         SO2                                             5.0                   2.1
         Pb                                           0.00011               0.000039

         Emissions to Water (kg)
         Pb                                           0.00018               7.0 × 10–6



30 times the mass of the computer itself. The energy consumption of the laptop, and
thus the many emissions associated with energy consumption, is considerably lower.
Because a secondary function of the laptop is to work when not plugged in, its vari-
ous components are optimized to decrease energy use. In interpreting this inventory,
however, it is essential to recall that the system boundary does not include the laptop
battery, and thus may neglect key elements such as heavy metal emissions that can
greatly affect the overall environmental impact.
   As would be expected from the energy-saving design of the laptop, less than
half of its nonrenewable primary energy consumption is due to use, compared with
use being responsible for three-quarters of the energy consumption in the desktop
Interpretation                                                                                          153


(Figure 6.2). The laptop production, however, requires almost as much energy as the
desktop production. In both scenarios, the distribution and waste treatment stages
consume less than 2% of the total energy.
   To further compare the energy consumption in the two scenarios, the manufactur-
ing stage can be divided into the different computer parts, each of which involves
material production, parts production, and assembly. Figure 6.3 compares these
manufacturing stages for computer monitors and printed circuit boards. The energy
for materials production is significant only for the desktop monitor, so this is the
only component that has the potential to save energy by being recycled. For other

                                 Desktop PC
                Distribution                    Waste
                                              treatment                     Laptop PC
                                                                                              Waste
                                                             Distribution
                                                                                            treatment

              Manufacturing

                                                                                      Use
                                           Use                   Manufacturing




FIGURE 6.2 Primary nonrenewable energy consumption at each stage in the PC life cycle,
scaled to indicate absolute consumption in each scenario.

                                        Assembly      Parts production      Material production

                          3000                                   3000


                          2500                                   2500


                          2000                                   2000
        Energy use (MJ)




                          1500                                   1500


                          1000                                   1000


                           500                                    500


                             0                                       0
                          Desktop cathode-ray tube Laptop                   Desktop         Laptop
                                            Screen                              Circuit board


FIGURE 6.3 Primary nonrenewable energy consumption for production of monitors and
circuit boards.
154                                            Environmental Life Cycle Assessment


components, any recycling benefits would be primarily to prevent the dispersal of
toxins into the environment (such as heavy metals).
   Both computers also use a large amount of energy for production of electronic
components and assembly of circuit boards. The importance of the circuit board
assembly stage is likely due to its manufacture and assembly in clean rooms, which
require substantial infrastructure and high consumption of energy for air condition-
ing and ventilation.

6.3.3 Impact Assessment
The desktop computer clearly dominates all the considered impact categories
(Figure 6.4), with the contribution of the monitor representing more than half of the
impact in every considered category. Although the laptop impact is less than 40% of
the desktop impact in all categories, note that the emissions and impacts associated
with the laptop battery have not been taken into account and could substantially
increase impacts on human health or ecosystems. Furthermore, the service life of
both the desktop and laptop has been set at 5 years when defining each scenario, yet
a desktop computer generally has a longer service lifetime than a laptop due to its
sturdiness and immobility. To further interpret the implications of these assump-
tions, a sensitivity analysis (Section 6.6.2) on the lifetime of computers could be
undertaken.
    The interpretation of the impact assessment phase must also note other contribu-
tions that have not been accounted for in this study, such as air transportation. An
estimated 5% of the impact of a computer is due to the transportation by air during
its manufacture (Kaenzig 2003). The impact of air transportation due to a laptop as a
passenger carry-on is also not included here, but would further increase this impact.
For long-distance transportation by air, every extra kilogram causes additional con-
sumption of 0.004 L of jet fuel per 100 km. If the laptop were transported 40,000 km



                                                Ecran
               Energy

                                                                      Desktop
          Greenhouse                            Ecran
               effect


           Damage to                               Ecran
         human health                                                 Laptop

            Damage to                           Ecran
            ecosystem

                        0%   20%     40%     60%        80%   100%


FIGURE 6.4 Impact assessment based on the critical surface-time method. Results are nor-
malized to the desktop PC scenario.
Interpretation                                                                                                                                                  155


per year by plane, the 200,000 km of transportation over the life of the laptop would
induce an additional 954 MJ of energy consumption, or 20% of nonrenewable pri-
mary energy.

6.3.4 Assessment Based on Updated Data and Method
This study has been updated using the ecoinvent v.2 inventory data for computer
and computer equipment. The laptop battery manufacturing and disposal is included
in this update. Figure 6.5 shows relative impacts comparable to those in Figure 6.4,
where the laptop does not exceed 40% of the impact of the desktop in most impact
categories, except for ozone layer depletion.
   Although the relative impacts of the updated analysis are similar to those of the
old analysis, the absolute values for primary energy and greenhouse gas emissions
differ, demonstrating the importance of using recent data. The new ecoinvent based
study estimates 7300 MJ/FU of nonrenewable primary energy and emissions of
370 kgCO2-eq/FU, compared with 23,000 MJ/FU and 860 kgCO2-eq/FU in the old study.
   Using the updated ecoinvent data, the impact categories with the highest nor-
malized damages are greenhouse effects, nonrenewable primary energy, respiratory
effects, and inorganic carcinogenic effects (Figure 6.6). In all these categories, the
laptop clearly has lower impacts.
   For both types of PC, the impact assessment identifies the contributions of each
pollutant to each impact category, such as the human health category (Figure 6.7).
Human health impacts are dominated by primary particulates (PM2.5) and secondary
particulates (sulfur dioxides transformed into sulfates and nitrogen oxides converted
to nitrates). These are common dominant sources of human health impacts.


 120%
 100%
  80%
  60%
  40%
  20%
    0%
                 c          c              s          n            n            s          ty          ty    n     n     n           n        g         y        n
              ni        eni          nic           tio        et
                                                                io        nic           ci          ci   tio    tio  tio         tio       in        rg       tio
          og
             e
                     og           ga           di
                                                  a
                                                           pl          ga             xi          xi        ic
                                                                                                               a
                                                                                                    pa ifica hica arm                             ne        ac
       in        in             or
                                 a                       de          or             to          to
                                                                                                c u      ph
                                                                                                                                                e         tr
    rc        rc     in       g r er          r y c ec
                                                             o             co        o        oc            id           p         l w able l ex
  Ca nca tory izin lay                     to          i                l e utr             d            ac           tro ba                        a
                                          a          t            r i a            e      n          i c          e u        l o         ew       er
      N
         o
                i ra  I on      n e
                                      spir
                                                 q ua        e st           i t y/     La       u at         t ic          G         r en Min
             sp              zo     Re        A           rr             id                  Aq qua                              on
           Re              O                           Te l ac                                      A                          N
                                                               i a
                                                            tr
                                                         es
                                                     e rr
                                                   T
                                                                                    Desktop                    Laptop


FIGURE 6.5 Comparison of relative midpoint impacts of a desktop and laptop PC, based
on the IMPACT 2002+ impact assessment method.
156                                                   Environmental Life Cycle Assessment


  0.05
  0.04
  0.03
  0.02
  0.01
      0
                                       in ic




                                                  ng
                                     id ion
                                                    n




                                                    n
                                     co ics




                                                    n
                      ne g ra cs



                                                    n




                                     l w on
                                     co ity

                                                   ty


                         at ccu n
                                                   ic




                                                  gy
                  Re yer atio




                                               tio
                                               tio
                                                 io




                                               tio
                                               en

                                               en




                                                ci
                                               ni




                               wa rmi

                                               er
                                                c




                                 ba ati
                                                n




                                               t
                                             et



                                             xi

                                             xi
                                              a
                                              a




                                           pa




                                            ac
                                            ca
                          on inog




                            nd ica
                                           og




                                          en
                                          rg
                                          rg

                                            i

                                          pl




                                           c
                                           o

                                          o
                                          d




                                          a



                                        tr
                                        ifi

                                        hi
                                         t

                                         t

                                        h
                                      de

                      qu y o
                                        o




                                      le

                                     ex
                                    op
                                      p
                                      n
                                    rc

                                    rc




                                    b
                                  ro
                                    i




                                 ce




                                   o
                                 le
                                   r




                                 ac
                               Ca

                                ca




                                 tr




                                 al
                                 n
                                ry




                               to




                              ut
                              zi




                           ria




                               o
                           eu




                            er
                               i




                            ic
                           to




                          ira
                           la




                          ne
                           at




                             l
                          ni




                          /e




                          G
                         La




                         in
                         st
                      ira




                        ic
                       N




                       re
                      sp




                       ty
                      Io




                     M
                    qu
                     re




                    at



                  on
                    di
                   sp




                    A
                  zo




                  er




                 qu
                  A
                 ci
               Re




                O




                N
                T

              la




               A
            ia
         tr
      es
   rr
Te




                                            Desktop     Laptop


FIGURE 6.6 Normalized endpoint impact scores for the desktop and laptop PC scenarios,
based on the IMPACT 2002+ impact assessment method.

                        3.0E–04

                                                         Others
                        2.5E–04
                                                         Airborne radon-222
      Human health (DALY)




                        2.0E–04                          Airborne dioxins
                                                         Airborne aromatic hydrocarbons
                        1.5E–04                          Airborne arsenic
                                                         Arsenic, ion in water
                        1.0E–04
                                                         Airborne nitrogen oxides
                                                         Airborne sulfur dioxides
                        5.0E–05
                                                         Particulates, < 2.5 µm airborne
                        0.0E+00
                                  Desktop   Laptop


FIGURE 6.7 Contribution of different pollutants to the human health damage, using the
IMPACT 2002+ impact assessment method.


6.4 QUALITY CONTROL
Because of the intensive use of data in a life cycle assessment, the interpretation
phase includes double-checking and verification at critical points, looking at impor-
tant data sets and key assumptions. This section presents a series of procedures
to ensure the validity of LCA results. Some checks are done at specific life cycle
assessment phases, and some are performed throughout the study. The main point
of quality control is to verify the consistency of results and look into anything that
is unexpected. In the case of the slightest unexpected or surprising result, never let
it go—either a mistake has been made (which is usually the case) or you have the
Interpretation                                                                       157


opportunity to learn something interesting and new. The analyst has no option but to
understand and explain the discrepancy.

6.4.1 Controls at Every Phase of LCA
6.4.1.1 Goal and Scope Definition: System Modeling
A properly conducted study requires a transparent and understandable representa-
tion of the system. For this, a systematic flow chart depicts each scenario and system-
atically numbered modules (see Figure 8.1) to avoid forgetting processes.

6.4.1.2 Inventory Analysis: Unit Control
Errors too often come from careless mistakes, especially when different units are
involved in large data sets. To minimize errors, the analyst must systematically
check units for each calculation, always carefully accounting for the factor of 1000
when converting between such units as grams, kilograms, tons, megajoules, and
gigajoules. Moreover, it is not always legitimate to add two quantities that have the
same units. For example, although the normalized scores for human health and eco-
systems are both expressed in person-years per FU, they cannot be summed directly
without implicitly or explicitly assuming weighting factors for the total normalized
impacts of these two categories.

6.4.1.3 Inventory Analysis: Mass Balance
One way to verify inventory results is to check the mass balances of certain elements.
The carbon balance is most commonly calculated (see the example in Section 8.2.4)
but balances of nitrogen, phosphorus, and heavy metals can also be checked.

6.4.1.4 Inventory Analysis: Energy and CO2 Balances “by Hand”
Several key steps are needed to establish consistent energy and CO2 balances for each
unit process and across the entire system. First, for each major foreground unit process,
we check the assumptions, intermediary flows, energy use per reference unit, CO2
emissions per reference unit, and finally the contribution of each intermediary flow to
the energy and CO2 emissions per FU (Tables 4.2 and 4.3). Particular attention should
be paid to the electricity mix chosen. Indeed, electricity mixes have very different
energy efficiencies and CO2 emission factors depending on their region or country of
origin (Section 4.2.2). Because this choice can greatly influence the LCA results, it is
important to clarify the assumptions under which calculations have been made.
   When calculating the CO2 balance, do not forget to account for the use stage and
the end of life, since a large part of CO2 emissions occur during the use stage through
combustion and during the waste disposal stage through combustion or eventual
decomposition. This aspect is often overlooked when using an ecoinvent data set in
which combustion is not included and can thus result in substantially underestimat-
ing CO2 emissions.
   LCA software programs (e.g., SimaPro) are extremely useful in performing the
large sets of calculations necessary for a full LCA, but can also lead to errors when
not properly handled. It is thus advisable to check that this software provides the
same results as those obtained “by hand” or spreadsheet calculations for a few key
158                                            Environmental Life Cycle Assessment


substances or flows. If differences concerning energy, CO2, or NOx exist, they must
be understood and explained.

6.4.1.5 Inventory Analysis: Comparing CO2 and Energy
One way to check the consistency of the inventory results is to compare energy con-
sumption and CO2 emissions for each submodule and for the entire FU.
   First, the ranking of scenarios based on CO2 emissions should in most applica-
tions be equivalent to the ranking based on nonrenewable primary energy consump-
tion. If they are different, either an error has been made or something new can be
learned from this difference.
   The ratio of CO2 emissions to nonrenewable primary energy usage (gCO2/MJ) is
calculated for each life cycle stage. The calculated ratios are then checked against
the values of the stage’s dominant processes and materials, using the typical values
in Figure 4.2 to check orders of magnitude. This step helps the analyst check whether
the results are totally absurd, or whether certain major stages in the life cycle were
not taken into account.
   One example of the importance of such a step is when petrochemical materials
and fuels are considered. Figure 4.2 shows that when the whole life cycle is accounted
for, including precombustion, usage, combustion, and waste treatment, petrochemi-
cal materials and fuels have ratios around 60 gCO2/MJ. Thus, an emissions-to-
energy ratio of 6–10 gCO2/MJ for diesel or fossil fuels means that the inventory has
only accounted for the fuel emissions before combustion. A value of 30 gCO2/MJ
for a plastic means that emissions during the elimination stage were neglected. It is,
therefore, important to check this ratio to avoid omissions of life cycle stages and
other calculation errors.

6.4.1.6 Inventory Analysis: Comparison of Inventory
          Results with Other Studies
Similar studies should obviously be taken into account when available. If the inven-
tory results differ from the results of previous studies, these differences and their
causes must be highlighted and explained, such as in a comparative table. The ori-
gins of these differences must be identified, such as underlying assumptions and
FUs, system boundaries, reference flows, coefficients of energy consumption, and
CO2 emissions per flow unit.

6.4.1.7 Impact Assessment: Toxicity Check
Because the calculation of human toxicity and ecotoxicity is still under development
and can vary between impact assessment methods, the impact analysis should be per-
formed using several different impact assessment methods, with careful consideration
for the contribution of each pollutant. The results obtained by different methods often
give different orders of magnitude, and these differences must be explained. It is also
crucial to test the robustness of results using a sensitivity analysis (Section 6.5.1).

6.4.1.8 Impact Assessment: Rules for Proper Use of LCA Software
When using LCA software, keep checking that all expected emissions and extrac-
tions are considered in the given impact assessment method. Sometimes an emission
Interpretation                                                                     159


is not properly included simply because its name is not strictly identical between
the inventory results and the impact assessment method (e.g., “nonmethane volatile
organic compounds” vs. “nonmethane hydrocarbons,” or “PM” vs. “particles” vs.
“particulate matter”). Since a given chemical can have hundreds of different names,
checks should be based on the chemical’s Chemical Abstracts Service (CAS) number
when possible.

6.4.1.9 Project Management: Recommended Use of Spreadsheets
Because of the large amounts of data considered, some rules must be followed when
using spreadsheets to minimize errors and increase transparency. First, no cell con-
taining a formula should contain a number. All data required for calculation should
be entered in separate cells, including unit conversion factors and constants. For
example, 1000 g/kg should be in a separate cell and documented as a unit conversion
factor rather than entering “1000” as part of a formula. If a given constant is later
updated (i.e., a new toxicity study updates the effect factor of particulates on human
health), this update will then automatically be reflected in all the formulas in which
this constant is used. Second, the units should be clearly indicated for each variable
and the units of the final results should be checked. Finally, each calculation must
be documented, including the assumptions made, explanation of the variables, and
origins of values.

6.4.1.10 Project Management: Rules for Project Documentation
Many LCA projects and data end up as unusable by anyone other than the creator,
because the associated computer files are too poorly annotated. To enable further use
of these projects, some precautions should be taken.
   First, the main results of the report should include enough information for a reader
to trace these back to their original spreadsheet(s). This may be a table or separate
document listing the files that contain the data for each figure of the report.
   Each of these files should be clearly documented, including a descriptive name,
the creator, and the date of the last major change.
   Similarly, to allow use of the individual processes in future studies, each process
should be given an understandable name, with the author and source of information
specified. Processes should also be entered in such a way that they can be verified by
matching the data format of the original data source.
   In summary, the data obtained during the study must be sufficiently and clearly
annotated, and the assumptions must be well defined and expressed in a transparent
manner for a later use by someone outside the project.

6.4.2 Critical or Peer Review to Check for a
       Comprehensive and Consistent Study
Once these more practical controls are complete for each life cycle assessment
phase, you should check that the assumptions, methods, and data are consistent
with the objectives of the study and that the results are comprehensive enough to
support a conclusion based on the objectives listed in the goal and scope defini-
tion phase.
160                                            Environmental Life Cycle Assessment


    Called a “critical review,” this ensures that the methods used to perform the life
cycle assessment are consistent with ISO 14040, that they are valid from a technical
and scientific point of view, and that the data used are appropriate and reasonable
regarding the objective of the study. It ensures that the interpretations reflect the
identified limitations and goals of the study and that the study report is transparent
and consistent. A critical review can be carried out internally or externally, but is
always performed by an expert independent of the study. ISO 14040 (pp. 9–11) pro-
vides more details on the procedure, and the SETAC code of practice (SETAC 1993)
provides key elements of the issues to be discussed in a critical review.
    The critical review task should be budgeted for as approximately 5%–10% of the
total LCA cost. It is preferable to involve the reviewers as soon as possible to be able
to take their comments into account before the end of the project. In addition to the
ISO and SETAC guidelines listed above, Klöpffer (2005) helps detail the mandate
and the modalities of such a review.


6.5 OVERVIEW OF UNCERTAINTY,
     VARIABILITY, AND DATA QUALITY
6.5.1 General Principles and Types of Uncertainty
How much confidence can we have in the results of an LCA study? In the case of a
comparative study, how do we know when the difference between two scenarios is
significant? To answer these questions, it is, firstly, important to know where these
uncertainties come from, what types of uncertainty they are, and how to take them
into account.
   Because of the many judgments made within an LCA, analysis of uncertainty and
sensitivity concerning various parameters is critical to understanding the robustness
of results. We describe here the types of uncertainty (Huijbregts 1998), how uncer-
tainty of input data can be characterized, and then how to assess uncertainty propaga-
tion through the system (Section 6.6). These assessment methods are then illustrated
through the instructional example of the front-end panel of a car (Section 6.6.5).

6.5.1.1 Uncertainties in the Four LCA Phases
When conducting an LCA, uncertainties arise based on the choices made during the
goal and scope definition, the inventory data of the inventory phase, and the char-
acterization factors and pollutant transport models of the impact assessment phase.
Table 6.3 and the subsequent sections briefly describe the various types of uncer-
tainty that occur in these LCA phases.

6.5.1.2 Parameter Uncertainty
Parameter uncertainty is expressed as a distribution of the possible values of a
parameter: the probability distribution function (Hogg and Tanis 1993). Examples
of such probability distributions are the normal, lognormal, or uniform distributions
(Figure 6.8).
   In the case of a lognormally distributed variable, the probability distribution func-
tion can be characterized by a geometric mean µ and the squared geometric standard
TABLE 6.3
Types of Uncertainty Occurring at Each Phase of the Life Cycle Assessment
                                                                                                                                                       Interpretation




                                                                                 Type of Uncertainty
                                                                                                                                    Technological/
                                Parameter and                                                       Spatial          Temporal         Population
                                  Input Data            Model                  Choice              Variability       Variability      Variability
LCA      Goal and scope                                                FU, system boundaries
 Phase   Inventory             Inaccurate or no    Linear instead of   Allocation methods,      Variations in       Temporal        Differences in
                                input flows and     nonlinear           technology level         intermediary        evolution of    technology
                                emission factors    modeling                                     flow provenance     emission        among factories
                                                                                                                     factors
         Choice of impact                          Undefined           Leaving out known        Spatial level of
          categories and                            impact              impact categories,       detail in method
          classification                            categories,         choice of                and factors
                                                    unknown             characterization
                                                    contributions       method(s)
         Midpoint and damage   Uncertainty on      Regional            Time horizon             Regional            Variation due   Differences in
          characterization      environmental       differences in      considered (e.g., 100    differences in      to seasonal     human exposure
                                model               emissions           vs. 500 years)           environmental       change in       patterns
                                parameters          factors                                      sensitivity         temperature
         Normalization and     Inaccurate          Weighting           Choice of weighting      Change in                           Variations in
          weighting             normalization       criteria are not    method                   normalization                       social
                                data                operational                                  data                                preferences
                                                                                                                                                       161
162                                                                  Environmental Life Cycle Assessment


      Probability distribution function    1




                                          0.5




                                           0
                                                                     x
                                                      Normal         Lognormal          Uniform


FIGURE 6.8 Schematic representation of normal, lognormal, or uniform distributions,
which can be used to characterize parameter uncertainties.


deviation GSD2. The GSD2 of a lognormal distribution defines the 2.5th and 97.5th
percentiles, which bound the 95% confidence interval around the geometric mean μ
(Equation 6.1):

                                                     ⎛ µ                     ⎞
                                                Prob ⎜       < x < µ × GSD 2 ⎟ = 0.95               (6.1)
                                                     ⎝ GSD 2                 ⎠

A GSD2 of 2 means that the parameter has a 95% probability of falling between 0.5
and 2 times the value of the geometric mean µ.
   In the specific context of LCA, the lognormal distribution is often applied by
default because the parameter values sometimes vary over several orders of mag-
nitude. In this case, the lognormal distribution has the advantage of automatically
excluding several impossible scenarios, such as negative emissions or negative uses
of processes, which are meaningless in most cases and could lead to erroneous
uncertainty estimates.

6.5.1.2.1 Model Uncertainty
To encompass the entire system, some of the system characteristics must be sim-
plified in the modeled system. For example, impact assessment models often
assume linearity of environmental processes, without considering possible non-
linear effects. Moreover, certain parameters are calculated based on correlations
with associated uncertainties. Bioconcentration factors in foods, for example,
are used to estimate the concentrations of substances in the food chain, and they
are often calculated based on correlations with the substance’s octanol-water
partition coefficient (Kow). The best strategy to reduce this type of uncertainty
is to take the time to search for and obtain measured rather than extrapolated
parameters, focusing on the most influential parameters identified during the
screening phase.
Interpretation                                                                     163


6.5.1.2.2 Uncertainty Due to Choices and Assumptions
Despite the LCA rules and guidelines, analysts still need to make certain choices
or assumptions, such as selection of the FU, the system boundaries, or the alloca-
tion procedure; these can each greatly impact the final result and thus introduce
uncertainty.

6.5.1.2.3 Data Variability
In addition to the intrinsic uncertainties discussed above, technological and envi-
ronmental processes may vary in space and time. When using lower levels of spatial
or temporal resolution, or if the location, temporal dynamics, or exact technology is
not specified, then this variability can lead to additional uncertainty on the results.

   • Spatial variability: Inventories and impacts associated with system pro-
     cesses can vary greatly with where these processes occur, yet most LCAs
     only account for spatial variability in a limited way. This is partly because
     the spatial distribution of emissions associated with an FU is often unavail-
     able. Every FU involves global supply chains, which make a spatial analy-
     sis of associated impacts highly complex. Therefore, calculations for the
     impact assessment often use generic factors (at a continental level), but new
     impact assessment methods such as IMPACT World+ provide the option
     of having factors spatially differentiated by country or by emission type.
     These more specific factors can only be used if the type or location of
     inventory data is specified.
   • Temporal variability: Technologies, their performance, and their impacts
     change over time. Due to the large data sets considered in an LCA, it is
     often difficult to properly account for the change in impacts based on when
     the technology was developed.
   • Technological variability: Differences between similar processes (due, for
     example, to the use of different technologies among factories producing the
     same product) may be another source of variability in the life cycle.

   In addition to these uncertainty types, errors can occur at any phase of the life
cycle and need to be identified by systematic verification and checking of results (see
Section 6.4).


6.5.2 Data Quality and Uncertainty Distribution for Input Data
6.5.2.1 Probability Distribution of an Individual Variable
Figure 6.8 illustrates three types of probability distributions used in the quantifica-
tion of uncertainty on the parameters of a life cycle assessment. In LCA, uncertain-
ties are often important and represented by lognormal distributions, thus avoiding
the possibility of negative emissions. It is rare, however, to actually have sufficient
measurements (over 30) to parameterize a lognormal (or Gaussian) distribution. In
such a case, uncertainties are estimated based on qualitative indicators that are then
transformed into semiquantitative distributions.
164                                               Environmental Life Cycle Assessment


6.5.2.2 Quality Indicators
Several quality indicators have been developed (Weidema and Wesnaes 1996;
Weidema 1998), including the following:

  • The reliability of data is based on the measurement method used and the
    verification procedures.
  • The completeness depends on the representativeness of the available data
    and the number of companies considered over a given time period.
  • The temporal, geographical, and technological correlations indicate
    whether the place, time, and technology of the collected data correspond
    well to the process studied.

    Each inventory data point is given a qualitative score between 1 (best) and 5
(worst) for each of these indicators. Table 6.4 presents the criteria for assigning
scores.
    To transform these qualitative indicator scores into a quantitative score, an
uncertainty factor can be assigned to each of the pedigree matrix scores using
Table 6.5.
    A supplementary factor characterizes the base uncertainty (UB), which is spe-
cific to certain demands of energy and resources and certain pollutant emissions
(Table 6.6). This factor is low for CO2 emissions because they are mainly due to
well-understood combustion processes, but it is relatively high for substances such
as heavy metals whose emissions vary with multiple parameters.
    The square of the geometric standard deviation (95% confidence interval) of the
considered value is then calculated based on Equation 6.2 (as derived from the gen-
eralized Equation 6.3 in Section 6.6.4):


 GSD 2 = exp ln(U R )2 + ln(UC )2 + ln(UG )2 + ln(UT )2 + ln(U L )2 + ln(U S )2 + ln(U B )2 		
		(6.2)

where U indicates the uncertainty factors based on reliability (UR), completeness
(UC), geographic correlation (UG), temporal correlation (UT), technological correla-
tion (UL), sample size (US), and the base uncertainty (UB).
   Taking the example of a process requiring aluminum, let us assume that the data
on the necessary quantity of aluminum required by this process have the following
characteristics:

  • Peer-reviewed and based on measurements (quality score of 1 for reliability)
  • Representative of a small number of enterprises and for an adequate time
    period (quality score of 2 for completeness)
  • Obtained less than 3 years prior to the current study (temporal correlation
    score of 1)
  • Coming from a geographical area having similar conditions to the condi-
    tions of the case study (geographical correlation score of 4)
TABLE 6.4
Data Quality Indicators with Five Levels of Quality as Described in a Pedigree Matrix
Quality Score                  1                                2                                3                              4                                5
                                                                                                                                                                                    Interpretation




Reliability       Verified data based on         Verified data partially based on   Nonverified data partially    Qualified estimate (e.g., by     Nonqualified estimate
                   measurements                   assumptions or nonverified         based on qualified            industrial expert)
                                                  data based on measurements         estimates
Completeness      Representative data from all   Representative data                Representative data from      Representative data from only    Representativeness unknown
                   sites relevant for the         from > 50% of the sites            only some sites (< 50%)       one site relevant for the        or data from a small number
                   market considered, over an     relevant for the market            relevant for the market       market considered or from        of sites and from shorter
                   adequate period to even        considered, over an adequate       considered or from > 50%      some sites but from shorter      periods
                   out normal fluctuations        period to even out normal          of sites but from shorter     periods
                                                  fluctuations                       periods
Temporal          Less than 3 years of           Less than 6 years of difference    Less than 10 years of         Less than 15 years of            Age of data unknown or
 correlation       difference to the time         to the time period of the data     difference to the time        difference to the time period    more than 15 years of
                   period of the data set         set                                period of the data set        of the data set                  difference to the time period
                                                                                                                                                    of the data set
Geographical      Data from area under           Average data from larger area      Data from area with similar   Data from area with slightly     Data from unknown area or
 correlation       studied                        in which the area under study      production conditions         similar production               distinctly different area
                                                  is included                                                      conditions                       (North America instead of
                                                                                                                                                    Middle East; OECD-Europe
                                                                                                                                                    instead of Russia)
Further           Data from enterprises,         Data from processes and            Data from processes and       Data on related processes or     Data on related processes on
 technological     processes. and materials       materials under study (i.e.,       materials under study but     materials                        laboratory scale or from
 correlation       under study                    identical technology), but         from different technology                                      different technology
                                                  from different enterprises
Sample size       >100, continuous               >20                                >10                           >=3                              Unknown
                   measurements

Source: Ciroth, A. et al. 2013. International Journal of Life Cycle Assessment. With permission.
                                                                                                                                                                                    165
166                                                     Environmental Life Cycle Assessment



   TABLE 6.5
   Default Uncertainty Factors (Dimensionless) Applied to Quality Matrix
   Indicator Score                  Abbreviation        1          2         3           4         5
   Reliability                          UR             1.00      1.05      1.10      1.20      1.50
   Completeness                         UC             1.00      1. 02     1.05      1.10      1.20
   Temporal correlation                 UT             1.00      1.03      1.10      1.20      1.50
   Geographical correlation             UG             1.00      1.01      1.02       —        1.10
   Technological correlation            UL             1.00       —        1.20      1.50      2.00
   Sample size                          US             1.00      1.02      1.05      1.10      1.20

   Source: Frischknecht, R. et al., 2004. International Journal of Life Cycle Assessment, 10, 3–9.
           With permission.


   • Exactly corresponding to the type of desired aluminum (technological cor-
     relation score of 1)
   • Obtained from a sample of unknown size (quality score of 5 for sample size)

    For a demand of materials, the basic uncertainty factor is 1.05 (Table 6.6). Having
determined the default uncertainty factors corresponding to the quality scores
defined for each data characteristic (Table 6.5), the variance of the aluminum quan-
tity is then
                                2        2         2        2       2       2        2
         GSD 2 = exp ln(1.00) +ln(1.02) +ln(1.00) +ln(1.02) +ln(1.00) +ln(1.20) +ln(1.05) = 1.21

Note that the final GSD2 (dimensionless) does not depend on the required quantity
of aluminum.
   Once the uncertainty over each individual component is determined as above,
these individual uncertainties are combined using Monte Carlo methods or a Taylor
series expansion. This yields the overall uncertainty of the inventory flows or impacts
per functional unit, as described further in Section 6.6, which also discusses the
essential concept of comparative uncertainty based on which parameters are com-
mon among scenarios.

6.6 ASSESSMENT AND MITIGATION OF UNCERTAINTY
Table 6.7 describes the appropriate methods for evaluating or mitigating each type of
uncertainty and variability. Each method is described in more detail in the subsec-
tions below.

6.6.1 Semiquantitative Approaches and Expert Judgment
6.6.1.1 LCA Standardization
For uncertainties associated with choice, standardization processes such as the ISO
14040 series promote sets of default choices that limit inconsistencies between stud-
ies and thus reduce the influence of different choices.
Interpretation                                                                                    167



   TABLE 6.6
   Ecoinvent Base Uncertainty Factors (UB, dimensionless) Applied to the
   Inputs and Outputs of the Technosphere and the Elementary Flows
   Input/Output                                               Input/Output
   Uncertainty on Intermediary                      Pollutants Emitted to Air:
    Flows: Demand of:
   Thermal energy                         1.05      CO2 [combustion, process]              1.05
   Electricity                            1.05      SO2 (sulfur dioxide)                   1.05
                                                     [combustion]
   Semifinished products                  1.05      NOx, NMVOCs, CH4, N2O, NH3a            1.50
                                                     [combustion]
   Materials                              1.05      CH4, NH3 [agricultural]                1.20
   Transportation services (ton-km)       2.00      N2O, NOx [agricultural]                1.40
   Waste treatment services               1.05      Individual VOCs [process]              2.00
   Infrastructure                         3.00      CO (carbon monoxide)                   5.00
                                                     [combustion]
   Uncertainty on Elementary                        Individual hydrocarbons, TSMb          1.50
    Flows: Resources:                                [combustion]
   Primary energy carriers                1.05      TSM [process]                          1.50
   Metals, salts                          1.05      PM10c                                  2.00
   Land use, occupation                   1.50      PM2.5                                  3.00
   Land use, transformation               2.00      PAHsd [combustion]                     3.00
   Pollutants Emitted to Water:                     Heavy metals [combustion]              5.00
   BOD, COD, DOC, TOCe                    1.50      Inorganic emissions, others            1.50
                                                     [process]
   Inorganic compounds (NH4, PO4,         1.50      Radionuclides (e.g., radon-222)        3.00
    NO3, Cl, etc.)f                                  [process]
   Individual hydrocarbons, PAHs          3.00      Pollutants emitted to soil:
   Heavy metals                           5.00      Oil, total hydrocarbons [process]      1.50
   Heavy metals [agricultural]            1.80      Pesticides [agricultural]              1.20
   Pesticides [agricultural]              1.50      Heavy metals [process,                 1.50
                                                     agricultural]

   Source: Frischknecht, R. et al., 2004. International Journal of Life Cycle Assessment, 10, 3–9.
            With permission.
   Note: Factors Apply to Combustion, Process and Agricultural Emissions, unless Otherwise
          Specified in Square Brackets.
   a Respectively, nitrates (NO, NO ), nonmethane volatile organic compounds, methane, and
                                      2
     ammonium.
   b Total suspended matter.

   c Particulate matter smaller than 10 μm.

   d Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons.

   e Respectively, biological oxygen demand, chemical oxygen demand, dissolved organic carbon,

     and total organic carbon, defined in Section 4.2.2.
   f Respectively, ammonia, phosphate, nitrate, chlorine, etc.
                                                                                                                                                           168




TABLE 6.7
Methods for Calculating and Reducing Different Types of Uncertainty
                                                                                                    Types of Uncertainty
                                                                                               Uncertainty
                                                             Parameter         Model             Due to         Spatial      Temporal      Technological
                                                            Uncertainty      Uncertainty        Choices        Variability   Variability     Variability
LCA standardization                                                                                  *
Expert judgment/independent reviewers                              *               *                 *              *             *              *
Sensitivity study                                                 **              **                **             **            **             **
Scenario analysis                                                                                   **                            *
Correlation and regression analysis                               *               **                                                            *
Nonlinear modeling                                                                **
Dynamic or spatialized modeling                                                    *                               ***          ***
Taylor expansion                                                 ***                                                **           *              **
Probabilistic simulation and Monte Carlo analysis               ****                                                **           *              **
Measurement comparison and additional data collection           ****             ****                                                          ****

Note: The number of stars reflects the adequacy of the method to address the considered type of uncertainty.
                                                                                                                                                           Environmental Life Cycle Assessment
Interpretation                                                                         169


6.6.1.2 Expert Judgment and Default Uncertainty Estimates
Many LCAs do not include a comprehensive and detailed uncertainty analysis.
Expert judgment has led to generally accepted default rules that can be used and
adapted when no other uncertainty analysis is available.

   • For energy and CO2, any difference less than 10% can be considered insig-
     nificant at first glance.
   • For respiratory inorganic effects or acidification and eutrophication, the
     difference between two scenarios should typically be greater than 30%
     to be significant. These percentages have to be adjusted depending on the
     required quality of the study and according to the impact category.
   • For toxicity characterization, the calculation of impacts often involves more
     uncertainty, requiring a difference of at least one to two orders of magni-
     tude between scenarios to be considered significant. This is especially true
     if the dominant emissions differ among scenarios, or if they correspond to
     the long-term emissions of a landfill, where the impacts are highly uncertain.
     For impact categories with such high uncertainties, it is often appropriate to
     represent differences in results on a log scale rather than a typical linear scale.
   • As described by Rosenbaum et al. (2008), the large uncertainties over the
     characterization factors for carcinogenic effects, noncarcinogenic effects, and
     ecotoxicity (one to three orders of magnitude) should be interpreted within
     the context of the large variation between characterization factors of chemi-
     cals (up to 12 orders of magnitude). This means, for example, that contribu-
     tions of 1%, 5%, or 90% of the total human toxicity impact can be considered
     equivalent but significantly higher than the impacts due to an emission that
     contributes less than 1% or less than one-millionth of the total impact.

   Failing to account for these variations in characterization factors is the principal
cause of misinterpretation of toxicity results in the different impact assessment meth-
ods. In calculating life cycle toxicity impacts, we can then identify substances that
contribute to, for example, at least 1% of the total score. This generally leads to the
identification of 10–30 chemicals to focus on, while the remaining 400 substances
can be ignored as not significant to this case study. The 10–30 important substances
are not necessarily in the accurate order of their impacts, and further analysis can
thus be performed to decrease uncertainties for each substance, including over the
relevant stage of the life cycle, the processes responsible for each emission, and the
respective importance of the fate, exposure, and effect in the total impact of this
substance.
   LCA software increasingly integrates methods of uncertainty propagation,
which enables a more detailed analysis of uncertainties using a variety of methods
described in the following subsections.

6.6.2 Sensitivity Study
The goal of a sensitivity analysis is to test the robustness of results and their sensitiv-
ity to data, assumptions, and models used. To do this, we move beyond preconcep-
tions to identify the key parameters that most influence the outcome.
170                                             Environmental Life Cycle Assessment


   One option is to vary each input parameter by a certain percentage and then
examine the resulting percentage variation of the model results. If the goal of the
LCA is to compare two products, the sensitivity analysis should relate parameter
variations to the difference between the two scenarios. Because many scenarios have
common processes, variations in certain processes will not cause significant varia-
tions in the differences between scenarios. The variation in differences between sce-
narios is generally smaller than the independent variation within a given scenario, so
this independent variation can be misleading. Another type of sensitivity analysis is
to vary the parameters between their reasonable minimum and maximum values and
to analyze the impact on the final result.

6.6.2.1 Scenario Analysis
A final option, called a scenario analysis (Huijbregts 1998), is to study the effect
of certain assumptions on the outcome of the assessment. For example, we test
the importance of the method of allocation (Chapter 4) by comparing how differ-
ent substitution assumptions or other allocation methods (e.g., financial allocation)
affect the final results (see Section 8.5 for another example). In addition, different
impact assessment methods involve different assumptions about the aggregation and
weighting of inventory results, which introduces uncertainties that can be quantified
by a sensitivity study on results from three different impact assessment methods.
   From an ecodesign perspective, a sensitivity study identifies the main factors that
can be adjusted to improve the environmental performance of a product.


6.6.3 Model Improvement Strategies
6.6.3.1 Nonlinear Modeling
Many LCA models assume linear responses in nonlinear phenomena, which intro-
duces uncertainties that nonlinear modeling can help mitigate. In dose–response
modeling used in impact assessment, for example, a default linear dose–response
curve is often used, yet in reality, the slope of the dose–response curve may vary
depending on background concentrations. With enough available data, this model
uncertainty can be reduced by fitting a nonlinear model to the data and then pro-
viding factors as a function of background concentration. The danger of such an
approach is that nonlinear models can have asymptotes. If an LCA predicts such
high impacts that, for example, all species will disappear, a nonlinear consequential
approach could suggest that decreasing the load slightly yields no improvement. In
such a case, a simpler linear relationship yields the more realistic result that decreas-
ing the load leads to the long-term reduction of impacts.

6.6.3.2 Dynamic or Spatialized Modeling
Model refinements that explicitly account for spatial or temporal variability are
increasingly available for both the inventory (e.g., ecoinvent 3.0) and impact assess-
ment phases (e.g., IMPACT World+). Thus, studies with enough information on the
location and timing of emissions can reduce the uncertainty of results by accounting
for local emission or characterization factors, rather than using generic aspatial or
Interpretation                                                                                171


steady-state factors. Chapter 5 discusses the spatial aspects of IMPACT World+ in
much greater detail.
   When studies consider a limited time horizon (e.g., a 100-year time horizon for
global warming), it becomes important to account for the temporal dynamics of both
releases and impact assessment factors. In the case of greenhouse gas emissions, six
different methods are proposed to account for the temporal dynamics (Brandão et al.
2013). The Levasseur et al. (2010, 2012) approach, in particular, is both rigorous and
easy to apply, since the authors provide a freely available Excel tool to account for
the temporal dynamic of releases (see website in Appendix I). This tool helps ensure
consistency between the dynamics of emissions and impacts in the case of global
warming and will thus reduce uncertainties associated with time horizons.

6.6.4 Monte Carlo Analysis and Taylor Series Expansion in LCA
6.6.4.1 Monte Carlo
Because inventory and impact assessment models can be very complex with large
amounts of data, it is difficult to algebraically propagate parameter uncertainties
to uncertainties on the model results. A Monte Carlo analysis uses a data-intensive
method to estimate the uncertainty on the final results by running through thousands
of simulations based on the possible input parameter values. When applied correctly,
it also determines the significance of a difference between two scenarios.
    A Monte Carlo analysis (Figure 6.9) first identifies each model input parameter
(p1, p2, p3, etc.) and its probability distribution (e.g., normal, lognormal, or uniform
as shown in Figure 6.8), by, for example, using the pedigree method presented in
Section 4.3.3. The model result Si is then calculated by randomly selecting a value
for each input parameter (p1,i, p2,i, p3,i, etc.) based on its probability distribution.
Repeating this operation many times (typically 1,000 to 100,000 times) yields a set
of results Si that can be statistically analyzed to define the distribution of the final
result S.


              p1



                                                                    S
              p2
                               p1,i
                               p2,i      Model          Si
                               p3,i
                             Run model for a large number of is

              p3



FIGURE 6.9 Uncertainty propagation using Monte Carlo analysis, propagating parameter
uncertainties to uncertainties on the model results. The distribution of each model result S is
based on a set i of input parameter values (e.g., p1,i, p2,i, p3,i) that are randomly selected from
the distribution of each parameter and then repeated for a large number of is.
172                                                     Environmental Life Cycle Assessment


    An LCA is often used to find the difference between two or more scenarios, so
one might be tempted to estimate the uncertainty over this difference by calculating
the results probability distribution of the results for each scenario and then finding
the probability distribution of the difference. This would only be acceptable if every
parameter of each scenario were independent, which is never the case in an LCA.
Different scenarios always involve common variables, such as the electricity or fuel
consumption that occurs in any production line. The characterization factors are also
not independent, as they are equivalent for a given pollutant regardless of the scenario.
    We use a concrete example to demonstrate this dependence. Imagine that, for a given
electricity mix, approximately 5 g of particulate matter are emitted per kilowatt-hour
of electricity produced, with an uncertainty of ±4 g (so emissions can range from 1 to
9 g/kWh). In the case of independence between the electricity mixes, we would calcu-
late a distribution of impacts for each scenario based on this range of particulate emis-
sion factors. We find that the largest difference in impacts between the two scenarios
occurs when Scenario B uses the highest possible particulate emission value (9 g/kWh),
and Scenario A uses the lowest emission value (1 g/kWh). In the case of both sce-
narios using the same electricity mix, it does not make sense to compare results where
Scenario B uses a different emission factor for that mix than Scenario A. For variations
of such shared input parameters, the two scenarios vary in parallel and the uncertainty
is overestimated if the Monte Carlo method is applied successively to each scenario.
    To properly compare two scenarios, one must compare the difference or the ratio
between the scenarios (Figure 6.10). For a given set of input parameter values, we
calculate the score of Scenario A (SA), the score of Scenario B (SB), and the relative
difference (SB − SA)/SA. Repeated simulation using an array of input parameter values
yields a distribution of scenario differences, from which we can calculate the prob-
ability that (SB − SA)/SA is less than or greater than zero.
    The reality may often prove to be between the full independence assumption—
that tends to overestimate the uncertainty—and the full dependence assumption that

         p1



                                                                              (SA – SB)/SA
         p2              p1,i
                         p2,i       Model       SA,i     (SA,i – SB,i)/SA,i
                         p3,i                   SB,i
                                Run model for a large number of is
         p3


FIGURE 6.10 Distribution of the difference between two scenarios based on Monte Carlo
analysis, and accounting for shared input parameters. Parameter values p1,i, p2,i, and p3,i
are randomly selected from the distributions of each parameter and used to calculate rela-
tive differences between model results for Scenarios A and B, (SA,i − SB,i)/SA,i. This yields
a distribution of the percentage difference between the two scenario results, assuming the
same parameter value for any shared input parameters. When most of the curve lies left of
the x-axis, there is a relatively high probability that Scenario B has a bigger impact than
Scenario A.
Interpretation                                                                               173


assumes that the same electricity mix is always used in different scenarios—that
may underestimate the uncertainty if different electricity sources are eventually
used. It is therefore useful to make both calculations, assuming independence and
full dependence, to provide an upper and a lower limit to the uncertainty.

6.6.4.2 Analytical Uncertainty Propagation Using Taylor Series Expansion
As an alternative to a more computationally intensive Monte Carlo simulation, Morgan
and Henrion (1990) proposed an analytical and transparent uncertainty propagation
method using a Taylor series expansion, which was later adapted, described, and
applied to a multimedia fate model by MacLeod et al. (2002) and to LCA by Ciroth
et al. (2004) and Heijungs (2010). Hong et al. (2010) further developed the Taylor
series expansion method, applying it to lognormally based uncertainty analysis to be
relevant for scenario comparisons. They applied the developed method to an auto-
mobile case study (see Sections 4.2.3 and 4.4.3) to explicitly estimate uncertainty
propagation simultaneously in life cycle inventory (LCI) and LCIA. This Taylor
series expansion method calculates the geometric standard deviation (GSD, defined
in Section 6.5) of the output as a function of the GSDs of the input parameters.

6.6.4.2.1 Single Scenario
In the case where all input factors are independent from one another, the GSD of the
output S is calculated as a function of the GSD of each input parameter p as follows
(MacLeod et al. 2002, Equation 6.3):

          ( lnGSDS )2 = s12 ( lnGSDp ) + s22 ( lnGSDp ) + …+ sn2 ( lnGSDp )
                                              2                        2                2
                                      1                            2                n       (6.3)

where the relative sensitivity (si) of the model output to the input parameter i describes
the relative change in the model output (ΔS) due to the relative change in this input
parameter i (Δpi) from the mean (Equation 6.4):

                                                      ΔS S
                                              si =                                          (6.4)
                                                     Δpi pi

6.6.4.2.1 Scenario Comparison
When comparing Scenarios A and B, the geometric standard deviation of the ratio
of the two scenarios (GSDA/B) can be expressed as a function of the difference in
sensitivity between Scenarios A and B to each input parameter pi (sAi − sBi ) and the
GSD of each input parameter (GSDpi), as in Equation 6.5:

                                 2
                   ⎛            ⎞
                                      ∑ ⎡⎣( s − s ) × (1n GSD ) ⎤⎦
                                                               2                2
                   ⎜⎝ 1n GSD A ⎟⎠ =                  Ai   Bi               pi               (6.5)
                             B            i


   The degree of confidence that the impact of Scenario A is lower than B is based
on the probability that A/B < 1. For a lognormal distribution, this probability can be
calculated according to Hong et al. (2010, equation 9, p. 503).
174                                            Environmental Life Cycle Assessment


   As the case study in the next subsection will show, the Taylor series expansion
method gives results similar to those of a Monte Carlo analysis. This is especially
the case when one particular process or impact dominates the total impact. When
the total impact is a combination of several similarly important components, the two
methods deviate more from one another.

6.6.5 Application of Monte Carlo and Taylor Series to Case Study
We will use the automobile front-end panel case study (Section 4.2.3) to illustrate
the Monte Carlo and the Taylor series expansion methods, comparing the climate
change impacts of steel with that of virgin aluminum. We find that the two different
methods predict similar impacts and uncertainties, with uncertainties influenced by
which parameters are common and which are considered independent (as described
in the previous subsection).
    Figure 6.11 presents a simplified flow chart for the steel and aluminum base cases.
The width of each arrow is proportional to climate change impacts of that process
over the product life cycle. Gasoline is a major contributor to the climate change
impact in both the aluminum and steel scenarios, and aluminum primary production
is another major contributor in the aluminum scenario.
    Each input parameter of the LCI has an uncertainty characterized by a log-
normal distribution, as defined by its data pedigree within the ecoinvent database
(Section 4.3.2, Frischknecht et al. 2005). The LCA software SimaPro 6.0 provides
the corresponding GSD2 for each parameter in each of the ecoinvent unit processes,
with 74% of all processes being characterized as lognormally distributed and 26%
undefined. SimaPro 6.0 was used to calculate the sensitivity of climate change
impacts to each parameter, as well as to run Monte Carlo simulations with 1000
iterations on these climate change impacts. To reflect the 35% uncertainty on the
global warming potential (GWP) indicated by the IPCC 2007 report, this study used
a squared geometric standard deviation (GSD2) of 1.35 as a close approximation. For
gasoline consumption, we run a low-uncertainty scenario (GSD2 of gasoline = 1.03)
and a high-uncertainty scenario (GSD2 = 1.77) assuming independence between steel
and aluminum (i.e., a high gasoline consumption in the steel scenario does not imply
a high consumption in the aluminum scenario). For petrol extraction and treatment
impacts, we also run a low (GSD2 = 1.1) and a high (GSD2 = 2.0) uncertainty sce-
nario, but assume that these vary in parallel in the steel and the aluminum scenarios.
    This study first used the Taylor series expansion method to calculate the two log-
normal probability distribution functions of climate change impacts of the steel and
aluminum scenarios (Figure 6.12). At first, one might assume that the probability
that the aluminum scenario has a higher impact than steel is the fractional area of
overlap between the two distributions, which would be the case if the two scenarios
used entirely independent sets of parameters. However, since the impact scores of
two LCA scenarios are generally based on multiple common LCI processes and
LCIA characterization factors, we cannot compare the impacts as if they were inde-
pendently calculated.
    To address the issue of common parameters, we can use a Monte Carlo simula-
tion to calculate the difference in climate change impacts between scenarios based
Interpretation                                                                                                175

                                                                                        1 piece
                                                                                    Steel front-end
                                                                                         panel
                                                                                   (ecoinvent data)
                                                                                263




                                                                                    80 L gasoline
                                                                             GSD2independent = 1.03 or 1.77
                1 piece                                                              0.08 m
                                                                                              3
              Steel front-                                                           Gasoline
               end panel                                                           consumption
              production
       38.2                                                                     225




             15.5 kg                140 MJ                98.3 MJ                      60 kg
       Steel, low-alloyed,        Electricity,     Light fuel oil, burned       Gasoline, unleaded,
        at plant/RER U         production mix        in boiler 100 kW,              at regional
                               UCTE/UCTE U         nonmodulating/CH               storage/RER U
       20.7                  17.5                  8.51                         39.2
            15.5 kg steel        19.7 kWh               98.3 MJ             CO2 emissions: 2.4 kgCO2/kg gas
            GSD2 = 1.1           GSD2 = 1.1            GSD2 = 1.1             GSD2common = 1.1 or 2.0
      (a)

             1 piece
          Al front-end
              panel
        (ecoinvent data)
       173




                                                                                   30 L gasoline
                                                                            GSD2independent = 1.03 or 1.77

             1 piece                                                                 0.0304 m3
        Aluminum front-                                                               Gasoline
            end panel                                                               consumption
           production
       87.1                                                                     85.4




             5.91 kg                83 MJ                77 MJ                         22.8 kg
          Aluminum,            Electricity, high      Light fuel oil,           Gasoline, unleaded,
           primary, at       voltage, production    burned in boiler                 at regional
          plant/RER U             UCTE, at               10 kW,                   storage/RER U
       73.4                  10.5                  6.72                         14.9
               5.9 kg Al         15.2 kWh                77 MJ              CO2 emissions: 2.4 kgCO2/kg gas
              GSD2 = 1.1         GSD2 = 1.1            GSD2 = 1.1             GSD2common = 1.1 or 2.0
      (b)


FIGURE 6.11 Flow chart and climate change impacts of the (a) steel and (b) aluminum
scenarios according to Hong et al. (2010). Associated squared geometric standard deviations
on the uncertainty of the most influential parameters are given as GSD 2 .
176                                                                                                              Environmental Life Cycle Assessment


                                                                                         0.02




                                                    Probabiblity distribution function
                                                                                                                       Aluminum
                                                                                                                       scenario
                                                                                                                       Steel scenario


                                                                                         0.01




                                                                                           0      µAl     µsteel
                                                                                           100       200         300     400        500
                                                                                                 Climate change impact (kgCO2-eq)


FIGURE 6.12 Lognormally distributed climate change impacts (in units of equivalent kilo-
grams of CO2) of the steel and aluminum scenarios, using the high uncertainty value on the
independent parameter of gasoline consumption (GSD 2independent = 1.77).


                                     0.09

                                     0.08
 Probability distribution function




                                     0.07

                                     0.06

                                     0.05

                                     0.04

                                     0.03

                                     0.02

                                     0.01

                                       0
                                            –100        0               100             200                  300                               400
                                                   Difference in climate change impacts, Ssteel – Saluminum (kgCO2-eq)


FIGURE 6.13 Probability distribution of the difference between steel and aluminum cli-
mate change impacts, using Monte Carlo analysis (independent case with GSD 2gasoline = 1.77
varying independently between the two scenarios).

on the same set of parameters. We repeat the operation a large number of times (e.g.,
10,000 times) to determine the probability distribution function of the difference,
and ultimately calculate the probability that the steel scenario has a higher climate
change impact than the aluminum scenario: P(steel − aluminum > 0). This probabil-
ity is equal to 7.5%, corresponding to the light gray bars in Figure 6.13.
    The Taylor series expansion method can also account for common parameters
and calculate the probability that one scenario has a greater impact than another, in
Interpretation                                                                                                           177


a very similar way (Equation 6.5). Rather than plotting the probability distribution
function of the differences between the two scenarios, we use the ratios of the two
impacts. The probability that the impact of aluminum is greater than that of steel—
P(steel/aluminum > 1)—is found to be 7.5% (shaded area of Figure 6.14), which is
virtually equal to the probability calculated with the Monte Carlo method.
   In addition to calculating the probability that one scenario has a higher impact
than the other, the analytic Taylor series expansion method provides the explicit
contributions of each parameter to the overall uncertainty (Figure 6.15). For the
steel scenario, gasoline consumption contributes most to uncertainty in the climate
change impact, followed by light fuel oil consumption. These processes contribute
more moderately to the uncertainty in the climate change impacts of the aluminum
scenario, which also has substantial contributions from electricity production and
aluminum primary production. By so easily identifying the sources of uncertainty,
future work can be better focused on minimizing these uncertainties and better pre-
dicting impacts and comparisons.
   This automobile case study illustrates application of the Monte Carlo analysis and
Taylor series expansion method to calculate uncertainties in inventory (Figure 6.11)
and impact assessment (Figure 6.12), predicting probabilities in comparing the
impacts of different scenarios. It addresses the importance of accounting for depen-
dencies on common parameters in LCA, both for common LCI processes and com-
mon LCIA characterization factors.
   The probability distributions obtained with the Taylor series expansion method
are very close to those from a classical Monte Carlo simulation, while being

                                               8
                                                                                         Base scenario
                                               7                                         GSD2steel/aluminum = 1.08
           Probability distribution function




                                               6                                         High GSDindependent
                                                                                         GSD2steel/aluminum = 1.77
                                               5
                                                                                         High GSDcommon
                                               4                                         GSD2steel/aluminum = 1.25

                                               3

                                               2

                                               1

                                               0
                                                   0   0.5          1         1.5          2           2.5           3
                                                        Ratio of climate change impacts, Ssteel/Saluminum


FIGURE 6.14 Probability distributions for the ratio of steel impact score (SSteel) to alumi-
num impact score (Saluminum) according to the Taylor series expansion for the base case (dotted
line), for the case where the gasoline impact is considered an independent parameter with
high uncertainty (dashed line), and for the case where the gasoline impact is considered a
common parameter with high uncertainty (solid line).
178                                                          Environmental Life Cycle Assessment


                                        100



                                        80                         Other
             Process contribution (%)
                                                                   Aluminum production

                                        60                         Electricity production
                                                                   Gas burned
                                                                   Oil burned
                                        40
                                                                   Gasoline

                                        20



                                         0
                                              Steel   Aluminum


FIGURE 6.15 Process contribution to the overall uncertainty of climate change scores cal-
culated by the Taylor series analytical approach for steel and aluminum.


significantly easier to obtain. Moreover, the Taylor series expansion method provides
each parameter’s contribution to uncertainty in a very transparent way. Note that
results between the two methods are generally similar when there is one dominat-
ing process or impact, but may differ more when multiple processes are somewhat
equally combined to yield the total impact. One limitation of this application of the
Taylor series method is that the input and output parameters must be assumed to
be lognormally distributed. Lognormal distributions are quite applicable to LCA,
because emission factors, characterization factors, and other parameters are usually
positive and can vary over orders of magnitude. Being confined to lognormal dis-
tributions for all input and output variables, however, is a significant limitation with
implications that must be further explored.
    Finally, application of both these methods illustrates that although an LCA can
have high absolute uncertainties, it is powerful in comparative settings, where, for
example, characterization factors are common among scenarios.

6.6.6 Comparison to Measurements and Additional Data Collection
The final results of an LCA cannot be verified by comparison to measurements,
since the impact of an FU throughout its life cycle is not measurable. Certain
elements of an LCA, however, can be verified experimentally, either at the unit
processes level for inventory, or for the assessment of certain environmental pro-
cesses and impacts. For the impact of toxic substances and their distribution in the
environment, it is possible to evaluate multimedia models (transfer of air, water,
soil, food) by comparing model-predicted substance concentrations resulting from
the known total emissions of a substance to concentrations measured in water, air,
soil, or the food chain.
Interpretation                                                                    179


    This approach of comparing modeled concentrations to measured values was used
to validate the impact assessment model, IMPACT 2002, based on one of the dioxin
congeners (Margni 2003). In this study, the substance properties were defined, and
emission data were collected from the literature to be used as the model input. The
verification of the IMPACT 2002 model focused on three complementary levels: A
first comparison involved the environmental concentrations (air, water, soil), a sec-
ond was related to the concentrations linked to ingestion (plants, meat, milk, eggs,
fish), and the final comparison was related to the fraction ingested by the population
(intake fraction). The results were compared with exposure estimates found in the
literature.
    Another way to improve the quality of the models and parameter estimates is
by collecting additional data on the parameters that contribute most to the uncer-
tainty of the results. Correlation and regression analysis can be used to identify and
thus prioritize the contribution of individual parameters to the total uncertainty
(Huijbregts 1998).

6.7 LCA SOFTWARE
LCA studies clearly involve a large amount of data, making hand calculations tedious,
and specialized software valuable for interpretation. Chapters 4 and 5 describe soft-
ware programs specific to inventories and impact assessment, and many of these
same programs are used for interpretation.
    The main commercial software programs available for conducting LCA are
SimaPro (Goedkoop et al. 2003) and GaBi (GaBi 2003). SimaPro is well designed
to simply present and interpret the inventory and impact assessment results, and to
easily review detailed contributions of each unit process. V. 7 allows for simultane-
ous analysis using both the process-based and input–output approaches (Chapter 4),
while estimating uncertainty propagation with the Monte Carlo method. GaBi uses
more aggregated processes based on industrial data, and is thus particularly rel-
evant for industrial applications in the automotive and electronics sectors and for
modeling nonlinear processes. The Quantis Suite software has been developed
recently to achieve the balance of a company as a whole and over all of its life cycle
(Section 7.3.7).
    Several free LCA software programs are also available. A first open-source
free program is being created within the framework of the openLCA project
(Appendix 1) to provide a modular software program for life cycle analysis and
sustainability assessments. Initially, it will begin with a basic framework for LCA
calculations of results and uncertainty, along with a tool to convert among differ-
ent data formats. The Open-IO project (Ciroth 2007) has already released a U.S.
input–output database specifically for openLCA. Second, Brightway2 is a powerful
recently developed tool allowing analysts to quickly perform cutting-edge calcu-
lations and visualizations (Appendix I). Third, CMLCA (Chain Management by
Life Cycle Assessment; Heijungs and Frischknecht 2005) is a program intended to
support the technical aspects of LCA. Although its user interface is not very flex-
ible, it can be used for rich data analysis, including a complete matrix algebra tool
with matrix inversion, as well as integrated methods for sensitivity analysis and
180                                            Environmental Life Cycle Assessment


uncertainty assessment. CMLCA supports fully hybrid inventories that consist of
both process-based and IO-based data, though the comprehensive IO database is
not free. The EORA input–output database also offers several assessment tools on
its website that can be highly useful in interpreting multiregional IO results (see
website listed in Appendix I). Finally, there are various non-LCA-specific tools
that use a life cycle approach, such as the carbon tool of the Association Bilan
Carbone (BC Bilan Carbone 2010), originally developed by the French Ministry of
the Environment (ADEME).
    Appendix II provides additional details on these various programs and other
available software.


6.8 ENVIRONMENTAL EVALUATION AND
     SOCIOECONOMIC EVALUATION
LCA can be undertaken for various decision-making applications (Chapter 3), such
as whether to accept or select a certain product, and whether to choose a certain pol-
icy. Although this book focuses on environmental considerations, decision-makers
often also consider economic and social dimensions. These aspects are not part of
traditional LCA, which focuses on the environmental assessment, but it is important
to see how they can be evaluated consistently with the LCA approach. This section
thus first describes life cycle costing and the cost–benefit analysis, followed by a
short overview of accounting for social aspects.


6.8.1 Life Cycle Costing
6.8.1.1 Introduction
Just as we can account for the extracted materials or emitted substances over the life
cycle of a product or a service, it is also possible to track and analyze the financial
flows over its life cycle. This economic evaluation of a product or service over all
stages of its life cycle requires knowledge of costs at every stage. The concept of
life cycle costing (LCC) can be defined similarly to that of environmental life cycle
assessment (Rebitzer 2002). According to Blanchard and Fabrycky (1998), “the life
cycle costing refers to all costs associated with the system for a given life cycle.”
Swarr et al. (2013) provide an LCC code of practice, presenting a comprehensive
model of all costs incurred by producers, ownership costs of consumers, and the
real costs imposed on other affected stakeholders, with consistent system boundaries
aligned with the requirements of ISO 14040.
    As is the case for an LCA, financial flows must be considered not only for the
production stage, but also for the use and other stages of the life cycle (Figure 6.16).
For the total cost of production, the producer must account for the costs of research
and development, as well as the actual manufacturing. This is then added to the costs
of wages and benefits to yield the sale price of the product that the consumer sees.
Since this sale price should include all of the preceding costs, it may not be neces-
sary to examine the upstream costs over the production chain in all detail. The user
also generally pays for costs associated with using and disposing of the product, such
Interpretation                                                                          181


           Costs for product manufacturer                Costs for product user

           Research and
                              Production                Use              End-of-life
           development
                                 costs                 costs               costs
               costs



                                            Feedback

                               Producer’s responsibility (when applicable)


FIGURE 6.16 Life cycle costing distinguishing production and consumption costs of a
product over its life cycle. (Adapted from Rebitzer, G. et al., 2003. Environmental Progress,
22, 241–249. With permission.)

as the electricity to run a product and any disposal costs. In some cases, legislation
requires that disposal costs are included in the purchase.
    There could be a feedback from savings in consumer costs back to the producer
(Figure 6.16). If the producer offers products that enable the consumer to lower
costs during use, they could, in theory, increase the sale price of the product without
costing the consumer more over the life of the product. For example, for a €18,000
car driving 15,000 km/year, the fixed costs (cost of car, insurance, etc.) amount to
€4000/year and the variable costs (oil, gasoline, services, tires, etc.) amount to €2700
(TCS 2003), of which gasoline consumption amounts to approximately €1000/year.
Thus, a car that can save the consumer 20% on fuel consumption represents a saving
of €200/year, which corresponds to an initial cost saving of €1500 (for an interest
rate of 2% and a term of 7 years). It would, therefore, be theoretically possible for
the manufacturer to sell the car for €1500 more without costing the consumer more
over the life cycle of the car. In principle, the manufacturer could use this increased
income to offset any additional costs involved in developing a more environmentally
friendly car. The automotive sector, however, generally follows a different logic,
whereby the most expensive cars are often the least fuel-efficient, in which case
the user of a car with a big engine is losing doubly in economic terms. In this case,
it is different performances or secondary functions that are sought, such as pres-
tige, comfort, aesthetics, and a sense of security. The increase in popularity of low-
energy-consumption light bulbs represents a successful example of increasing the
initial price of a product while decreasing total life cycle costs.
    In general, an LCC includes all costs associated with physical processes, materi-
als and energy flows, labor costs, costs of knowledge use (patents), and transaction
costs. We can use the inventory data obtained during an LCA to determine most of
these costs. The flows of materials and energy captured in an LCA inventory can be
multiplied by the unit prices paid by the company or by the market prices. The costs
that cannot be derived from the LCA inventory are those associated with labor and
research and development (R&D) of the product or service, so these must be deter-
mined separately.
    An important and influential choice is the selection of a discount rate to com-
pare costs that occur at different points in time over the life cycle. As discussed by
182                                                                           Environmental Life Cycle Assessment


Asselin-Balençon and Jolliet (2014), we suggest using the effective cost of capital
as a default discount rate which is linked to the long-term financing rate. For a pro-
ducer, this may be equal to the average of the interest rate and the rate associated
with the cost of capital as retributed to its shareholders. For a consumer, the long-
term interest rate may be more appropriate, but the inflation rate may also be con-
sidered from a societal perspective. The internal rate of return (IRR)—the rate that
makes the difference in life cycle cost between two scenarios equal to zero—is also
a useful metric and well suited for decision-making purposes. The higher the IRR of
a scenario, the more profitable it is. The advantage of the IRR is that it is independent
of both the chosen discount rate and the interest rate. The IRR can be then compared
to the long-term financing rate (e.g., 6.5%) that represents a breakeven situation.

6.8.1.2 Example: Sewage Sludge Treatment and Transport
We present an example of the transport of sewage sludge (Rebitzer 2003) to illustrate
an LCC. This study finds the contribution of each stage of the sludge treatment to the
total environmental impacts and total cost. More details on the treatment of sewage
sludges and their environmental impacts from a broader perspective are presented
in Chapter 8.
   Figure 6.17 shows the climate change impacts of each stage in the treatment and
transport of sewage sludge, where the drying and transport of sludge contribute most

                                       70

                                       60       Others
                                              Solid waste
                                              management
                                       50
   Climate change impacts (kgCO2-eq)




                                              Sludge drying
                                       40

                                       30                       Polymers
                                             Sludge transport   Iron sulfate
                                       20                        (inorganic
                                                                flocculant)
                                       10     Electricity for            Natural gas
                                                treatment              substituted by
                                               installation             digestion gas
                                        0
                                                                    Heat substituted by
                       –10                                          sludge incineration

                       –20
                                            Treatment impacts        Avoided impacts         Total impacts


FIGURE 6.17 Climate change impacts (in equivalent kilograms of CO2) from different ele-
ments of sewage sludge treatment and transport, assuming a transport distance of 40 km
and a dry solid content under 30% at the exit of the station purification. The third column
represents the sum of the impacts of the first two columns (emissions from consumption
minus any emissions avoided through substitution). (Adapted from Rebitzer, G. et al., 2003.
Environmental Progress, 22, 241–249. With permission.)
Interpretation                                                                                          183


to climate change impacts. These two stages also contribute most to the life cycle
costs (Figure 6.18). Acting on these stages is therefore likely to be both profitable and
environmentally beneficial, such as increasing the dry solid content of the sludge at
the outlet of the treatment plant, which would decrease the energy needed for both
sludge drying and transportation.
   A sensitivity analysis on the sludge dry solid content (Figure 6.19) shows that
when a flocculating agent is applied to increase sludge dry solid content, there are
substantial reductions in the costs of drying and transport. One can save up to 65%
when dry solid content is increased from 15% to 45%. Because this increased dry
solid content also decreases the transported loads and the energy needed to dry the
sludge, climate change impacts are similarly reduced.

6.8.2 Cost Internalization
When the life cycle costs and environmental impacts are known, how can the two be
compared? One approach is to express environmental impacts in financial terms, so
they can be combined with economic costs. This is commonly referred to as inter-
nalization of external costs.
   To internalize environmental costs, a cost must be estimated for each environmental
impact, including damages to human health and ecosystems. These cost estimates can
be based on a variety of approaches, such as costs reimbursed by insurance or someone’s

                                    80

                                    70   Sludge incineration
                                                               Solid waste
                                                               management
                                    60
    Costs ($ per person per year)




                                    50     Sludge drying

                                    40

                                    30

                                    20    Sludge transport


                                    10       Polymers
                                            Iron sulfate
                                             Electricity
                                     0
                                                                         Natural gas
                       –10                                             substituted by
                                                                        digestion gas
                                          Treatment costs            Substitution costs   Total costs


FIGURE 6.18 Financial costs (in U.S. dollars per person per year) from different elements
of sewage sludge treatment and transport, assuming a transport distance of 40 km and a dry
solid content of the sludge of 30% at the exit of the station purification. The third column rep-
resents the sum of the costs of the first two columns. (Adapted from Rebitzer, G. et al., 2003.
Environmental Progress, 22, 241–249. With permission.)
184                                                                        Environmental Life Cycle Assessment


                                             140
                                                                         Transportation costs (40 km)
                                             120                         Flocculant
                                                                         Drying costs
             Costs ($ per person per year)
                                             100


                                              80


                                              60


                                              40


                                              20


                                               0
                                                   15   20        25       30        35      40    45
                                                             Dry solid content of sludge (%)


FIGURE 6.19 Dominant costs of municipal sewage treatment and their variation with the
dry solid content of sludge. (Adapted from Rebitzer, G. et al., 2003. Environmental Progress,
22, 241–249. With permission.)


willingness to pay to avoid this damage. Estimates can account for the costs necessary
to deal with an impact or the extra cost generated by the damage (such as through nec-
essary health care), but this risks confounding the measurement of the impact severity
with its ease of remedy. In any case, these estimates involve value judgments.
   It is possible, for example, to calculate the equivalent cost of pollution from
Swiss traffic. One way is to calculate the cost per kilometer driven C (€/km) as in
Equation 6.6:

                                                        C = SHuman Health × CDALY                        (6.6)

where SHuman Health is the human health damage score due to traffic, calculated in
units of disability-adjusted life years (years lost due to ill health, disability, or early
death) per kilometer driven (DALY/km). CDALY is the cost assigned to one year lost
(€/DALY).
   In 1997, Switzerland had a fleet of 3.3 million gasoline cars and 110,000 diesel
cars, with each vehicle traveling an average of 13,800 km per year. The exhaust emis-
sions from such a fleet result in approximately 3600 DALY of human health damage
every year (Tauxe 2002). Assuming that society is willing to pay €100,000 to avoid
the equivalent of one year of life lost (ExternE 1998), this would correspond to an
external cost of €360 million. As a side note from LCC, such a health analysis can be
used to compare environmental impacts to more typical impacts, such as accidental
traffic deaths. Once we account for the particles emitted from road abrasion and tires,
environmental emissions are predicted to result in 12,000 DALY per year, which is
the same order of magnitude as traffic accidents (600 deaths and 23,800 DALY).
Interpretation                                                                     185



                     TABLE 6.8
                     Comparison of Fuel Cost to Cost
                     Associated with Human Health
                     Impacts
                                   Fuel Cost     Human Health Cost
                     Gasoline         8.1               0.7
                     Diesel           4.5               2.9

                     Note: € per 100 km of driving.



    On this basis, Tauxe (2002) show that, for diesel, the external costs associated
with human health damage are of the same order of magnitude as the cost of the fuel
itself (Table 6.8).
    Some impact assessment methods, such as EPS (Section 5.5.2), directly give the
results of the characterization and weighting in monetary values, values that could
potentially be summed to the direct costs. However, care must be taken when sum-
ming and comparing different types of costs to ensure that adding them is legitimate.
    As another example, Fantke et al. (2012) determined the external costs associ-
ated with the overall use of pesticides in Europe. They quantified health impacts
and related damage costs from exposure to 133 pesticides applied in 24 European
countries in 2003, adding up to almost 50% of the total pesticide mass applied in
that year. They found that only 13 substances applied to three crop classes (grapes/
vines, fruit trees, and vegetables) contributed to 90% of the overall health impacts of
about 2000 DALY in Europe per year. Considering the high uncertainties along the
full impact pathway, mainly attributable to noncarcinogenic dose–response relation-
ships and residues in treated crops, they obtained an average burden of lifetime lost
per person of 2.6 hours. Accounting for the high uncertainties along the full impact
pathway, which were mainly attributable to noncancer dose–response relationships
and residues in treated crops, they calculated a 95% confidence interval between 22 s
and 45.3 d. The costs per person over their lifetime amounted to €12, with a 95%
confidence interval between €0.03 and €5142.

6.8.3 Cost-Environmental Performance Representation
Where should you invest $1 to achieve the greatest reduction of environmental
impact? Accounting for economic and environmental aspects in parallel can help
you choose the scenario that optimizes investment. Figure 6.20 suggests how to
depict different scenarios that increase or decrease the environmental impacts and
economic costs, by representing the change in cost compared to a reference scenario
on the x-axis and the change in environmental performance on the y-axis.
   Compared to a reference scenario, four types of alternative scenarios can be
defined:
   1. The first case corresponds to a “win-win” situation, in which the alternative
      scenario reduces both the environmental burdens and the costs.
186                                                                    Environmental Life Cycle Assessment


                                                   Purely
                                                                           Loser
                                                 economical
                                                     4                       3




                          Environmental impact
                                                                     Reference scenario




                                                     1                       2
                                                  Win-win             Environmentally
                                                                         motivated
                                                              Cost


FIGURE 6.20 Representation of different scenarios with respect to a reference scenario,
based on the change in environmental impacts as a function of the change in economic costs.


   2. The second case corresponds to a scenario with decreased environmental
      impacts, but increased costs. The vector from the reference scenario to this
      second scenario would ideally have a steep negative slope. We can perform
      an analysis to determine which investment provides the greatest environ-
      mental improvement per unit investment. To this end, the ecological effi-
      ciency η is (Equation 6.7):


                                                              η = ΔS                                 (6.7)
                                                                  ΔC
    where:
   		 Δ S is the reduction in environmental impact score (e.g., kgCO2-eq or DALY)
   		 Δ C is the cost increase (in e.g., €)

		 This ratio can be calculated to discriminate among different scenarios, but
    also to determine, within a given scenario, in which life cycle stage to invest
    in as a priority.
 3. The third case corresponds to losing both environmentally and financially,
    since it leads to greater environmental and economic burdens.
 4. Finally, the fourth case corresponds to a financially beneficial but envi-
    ronmentally unfavorable scenario. This corresponds to a purely short-term
    economic view, as illustrated by the following example comparing different
    car bumpers (Rebitzer et al. 2001).

   This study includes an environmental life cycle assessment and an LCC compar-
ing three types of car bumpers (Figure 6.21).
   Compared to the polyamide bumper reinforced with glass fiber, the hemp-fiber-
reinforced polypropylene scenario has the lowest environmental impact and lowest
cost and is thus a win-win situation. The magnesium bumper is environmentally and
economically unfavorable.
Interpretation                                                                                                187


                                            160

                                            140
                                                                                        Magnesium
         Climate change impact (kgCO2-eq)
                                            120

                                            100

                                             80

                                             60
                                                                                          Polyamide
                                             40                                        reinforced with
                                                       Polypropylene
                                                                                          fiberglass
                                             20       reinforced with
                                                        hemp fiber
                                              0
                                                  0    10               20                  30           40
                                                                Life cycle costs (€)


FIGURE 6.21 Relationship between cost and climate change impact for three car bum-
per scenarios. (From Rebitzer, G. et al., 2001. Systematische Auswahlkriterien für die
Entwicklung von Verbundwerkstoffen unter Beachtung ökologischer Erfordernisse—
Abschlussphase (euroMat 2001), Forschungsbericht, BMBF-Förderprogramm Sicherung
des Industriestandorts Deutschland, Projektträger DLR, 637–688. With permission.)

   The win-win case (1) seems ideal. In practice, however, many decision-makers
and consumers will reinvest this saved money in an equally or even more polluting
activity (e.g., a vacation in the Bahamas), making this scenario ultimately result in
equal or higher environmental impacts. It is thus important to consider such rebound
effects, as described in the following section.

6.8.4 Rebound Effect
As mentioned above, win-win situations only lead to environmental improvements
when the financial gain is reinvested in less polluting activities, or rather, used to
further reduce environment impacts. Another risk is that because of cost reduc-
tion, people will consume more of the goods and therefore limit the environmental
gain. For example, as light bulbs become more energy efficient, the light level has
increased in parallel in households and streetlamps, thus reducing the environmental
benefits (Herring 1999). Dahmus (2014) analyzed the historical efficiencies of the
following 10 activities: pig iron production, aluminum production, nitrogen fertil-
izer production, electricity generation from coal, oil, and natural gas, freight rail
travel, passenger air travel, motor vehicle travel, and refrigeration. Over long time
periods, improvements in efficiency have not succeeded in outpacing increases in the
quantity of goods and services provided, resulting in a sizable increase in resource
consumption across all 10 sectors.
   In such situations, an LCA can be misleading, since the impacts per FU are
reduced, but the ultimate environmental burden could increase. Such effects can
be addressed by using a life cycle perspective to analyze the overall impact of a
188                                            Environmental Life Cycle Assessment


consumer, company, or country, which would then account for all types of consump-
tion, including the reinvestment of saved money (Kaenzig and Jolliet 2007).
   Policies can be implemented to help avoid such rebound effects, in which stan-
dards or incentives are given to ensure that financial benefits from win-win solutions
are reinvested to further reduce environmental loads.

6.8.5 Accounting for Social Aspects
Using the input–output method described in Section 4.4, it is possible to quantify the
creation of jobs throughout the life cycle of a product or for an investment in a given
industry (Frei 2000). This method replaces the emissions per euro from each sector
by the number of jobs created per euro; thus, the number of jobs created per FU is
calculated as in Equation 6.8:

                                   t = P(I − A
                                             % )−1y%                              (6.8)

where:
     t is the vector of created jobs
    P is the employment matrix per monetary unit invested in a sector
   Ã is the economic matrix expressing the expenses of each sector in every
       other sector
   y% is the demand expressing the amount spent in each sector per FU

   This method was applied in a study conducted by Corbière-Nicollier and Jolliet
(2003) to assess the environmental, economic, and social sustainability of various
regional actions. This study determined the CO2 emissions, employment, and added
value generated by an increase in investment of SF1 million in one of various eco-
nomic sectors of the canton of Vaud in Switzerland. Figure 6.22 presents the result-
ing impacts for three sectors: food and lodging, communication, and construction.
   Investing in the food and lodging sector would result in the greatest CO2 emis-
sions (66 tons/year), but would also create the most jobs (15 persons/year). The added
value does not vary much among sectors.
   In 2009, a working group published guidelines for the social life cycle assessment
(SLCA) of products (UNEP 2009). This was done through the UNEP-SETAC Life
Cycle Initiative, and in partnership with the International Reference Centre for the
Life Cycle of Products, Processes and Services (CIRAIG), the Québec Action Fund
for Sustainable Development (FAQDD), and the Belgian Federal Public Planning
Service. The objective of a social LCA is to analyze and improve social and envi-
ronmental performances of human activities to contribute to greater profitability
and greater well-being in the long term. The guidelines describe the history, key
concepts, and scope of application of various tools, focusing on the concepts of sus-
tainable production and consumption, as well as corporate social responsibility. The
SLCA includes the main phases of the classic LCA according to ISO 14040 and
14044, modified to integrate social and socioeconomic considerations.
   Building on this work, Table 6.9 presents the impact categories in a manner simi-
lar to the LCIA framework of the Life Cycle Initiative (Jolliet et al. 2004, table 1),
                                     70                                                                                                  16
                                     60                                                                                                  14
                                                                                                                                                                                              Interpretation




                                     50                                                                                                  12
                                                                                                                                         10
                                     40
                                                                                                                                          8
                                     30
                                                                                                                                          6
                                     20




                                                                                                                    Jobs (person/year)
                                                                                                                                          4




            CO2 emissions (t/year)
                                     10                                                                                                   2
                                      0                                                                                                   0
                                          Food and lodging Communication                         Construction                                 Food and lodging Communication   Construction


                                                                                       1

                                                                                      0.8

                                                                                      0.6

                                                                                      0.4




                                                              Added value (SF/year)
                                                                                      0.2

                                                                                       0
                                                                                            Food and lodging    Communication                      Construction


FIGURE 6.22 Impact on CO2 emissions, employment, and added value of the investment of SF1 million in the canton of Vaud (Switzerland) in three
economic sectors (food and lodging, communication, and construction).
                                                                                                                                                                                              189
                                                                                                                                                                                  190

TABLE 6.9
Table to Indicate the Types of Impact (Row) and Damage (Columns) Categories Considered in Social LCA
                                                                                     Damages Related to Intrinsic Values            Damages Related to Functional Values
                                                                                      Human Health,           Human Rights +         Governance            Socioeconomic
                                                                                         Safety +             Equality: Society                             Repercussions
                                                                                   Psychological Health          + Workers
Human health and environmental         Human toxicity, societal and workers                  ⊗
 impacts
                                       Human toxicity, worker                                ⊗
                                       Casualties, societal                                  ⊗
                                       Casualties, worker                                    ⊗
                                       Freshwater depletion                                  ⊗
Labor and production                   Local employment                                                                                                           ⊗
                                       Fair salary                                                                    ⊗                     x                     x
                                       Working hours                                                                  ⊗
                                       Forced labor                                                                   ⊗
                                       Child labor                                                                    ⊗
                                       Gender equity                                                                  ⊗
                                       Labor and company governance                                                   ⊗                    ⊗
Local community and social life        Access to resources                                    x                                                                   (x)
                                       Education
                                       Community engagement                                                                                                       (x)
                                       Interpersonal relations                                x
                                       Indigenous rights                                                              ⊗                     x
                                       Societal private + public governance                                                                 x                      x

Note: “⊗” indicates links that could be quantitatively modeled, “x” indicates other links, and “()” indicates links that are only relevant if the corresponding damage category
      were included in the LCA
                                                                                                                                                                                  Environmental Life Cycle Assessment
Interpretation                                                                         191


defining impact categories grouped by stakeholder along the life cycle in rows and
damage categories or area of protection in the columns. Further work is needed in
this area, but the attributional LCA approach proposed by Norris (2006) and its
adaptation to social LCA by Benoit-Norris et al. (2012; also see the Social Hotspots
Database listed in Appendix I) represent an interesting initial operationalization
toward a more complete social LCA.


EXERCISES
Exercise 6.1: Comparing Hand-Drying Scenarios Using LCA Software
You will now use LCA software (e.g., SimaPro) to calculate results that can be com-
pared to your previous hand calculations from Exercises 4.2 and 5.2.

   • Step 1: Enter data for the two scenarios in the software (see guidelines for
     performing calculations in SimaPro on the CRC Press website, Exercise
     6.1) and calculate the emissions inventory and impacts.
   • Step 2: Compare the energy use, CO2 emissions, and other inventory flows
     of the two scenarios by using an impact assessment method (e.g., IMPACT
     2002+).

   Answer the following questions:

   1. Compare your software results for energy use and CO2 emissions to the
      hand calculations from the previous exercise, and explain any discrepan-
      cies. Fill in a copy of Table 6.10 for each scenario.
   2. Based on the software results, which scenario is better from an energy use
      perspective? What about from a global warming perspective?
   3. Use the software to determine which scenario results in more lead
      emissions.

   The scenarios can be built based on Figure 6.23. Note: To facilitate later work
(sensitivity analyses, etc.), we recommend you create a process based on the measur-
ing unit considered (one towel, 1 MJ, one apparatus) and then adjust the reference
flow of each process to apply to the considered FU. For detailed instructions on how
to build these scenarios in SimaPro, see the CRC Press website, Exercise 6.1.

Exercise 6.2: Determining Uncertainty with Pedigree
For the PM2.5 emissions associated with 1 kg liquid aluminum, the emission factor
amounts to 0.0026 kg; and the uncertainty pedigree characterizing this emission
flow is (1, 1, 2, 1, 1, 3) corresponding to, respectively, (UR, UR, UG, UT, UL , US), for a
lognormal distribution.

   1. Obtain the base uncertainty UB for PM2.5 from Table 6.6.
   2. Determine the default uncertainty factors UR, UR, UG, UT, UL , US scores
      using Table 6.5.
                                                                                                                                         192




TABLE 6.10
Table of Values to Calculate and Compare
                             Hand Calculations                 Software Calculations                  Differences
Life Cycle Stage
Process (unit)       Energy (MJ/unit)   Energy (MJ/FU)   Energy (MJ/FU)      CO2 (kg/FU)   Energy (MJ/unit)   Energy (MJ/FU)   Comment
Materials
Cast iron (kg)
Steel (kg)
Transport
Transport (ton-km)
Use
Electricity (kWh)
Waste
Landfill
Total
                                                                                                                                         Environmental Life Cycle Assessment
                     Process        Process        Process               Process             Process           Process               Process            Process
                                                                                                                                                                     Interpretation




       Existing      Plastic       Transport         Paper           Paper-landfilled         Steel           Cast iron          Metal-landfilled      Electricity
      processes      output:        output:         output:              output:             output:           output:               output:            output:
                   1 kg plastic      1 tkm        1 kg paper       1 kg paper landfilled    1 kg steel      1 kg cast iron     1 kg metal landfilled   1 TJ used



                                 Process               Process                                                Process
                                Dispenser              Towel                                                 Air-dryer
          New              - Plastic              - Paper                                                - Steel + cast iron
      processes            - Transport            - Transport                                            - Transport
                           - Plastic landfilled   - Paper landfilled                                     - Metal landfilled
                            Output: 1 device       Output: 1 towel                                       Output: 1 device



                                         Process paper towel FU                                                        Process air-dryer FU
                                    - Towel                                                                  - Electricity
      Assembly
                                    - Dispenser                                                              - Device
                                        Output: 1 pair dry hands                                                    Output: 1 pair dry hands



      Calculate/
                                                                          Scenario comparison
       compare


FIGURE 6.23 Diagram of useful processes for the comparison of hand-drying scenarios in LCA software.
                                                                                                                                                                     193
194                                          Environmental Life Cycle Assessment

                        2
   3. Calculate the GSD0 for PM2.5 using Equation 6.2.
                                 2
   4. Interpret the obtained GSD0 , providing the 95% confidence interval on
      the PM2.5 emission factors of 0.0026 kg PM2.5 per kilogram of liquid
      aluminum.

Exercise 6.3: Interpretation of Steel Front-End Panel
You have been hired by Tesla Motors to work in collaboration with the material sci-
ence department to develop new front-end panels. A front-end panel is a structural
component that bears other elements and equipment such as the headlights and the
radiator grill. Use the results presented throughout the book on the front-end panel
scenarios to make recommendations for future designs.
   First, you would like to determine which substances contribute most to human
health impacts in the steel front-end panel scenario.

   1. Use Figure 5.6 in Chapter 5 to determine the two midpoint categories that
      contribute most to the human health damage considering both short- and
      long-term damage.
   2. Use Table 6.11 to calculate the following quantities:
       • Midpoint impact for each substance
       • Total impact for each midpoint impact category
       • Total damage for human health
       • Normalized damage for human health
   3. Assume carcinogenic impacts generally have a factor 100 uncertainty
      (meaning that the actual value ranges between 100 times higher and 100
      times smaller) and respiratory inorganic impacts have a factor 10 uncer-
      tainty. Which substances should be treated as having significant and
      equivalent damage in this case, and which can be considered as having a
      negligible contribution?
   4. In Chapter 4, the CO2 emissions of the steel scenario are calculated as
      follows:

		1.28 kgCO2/kg steel × 10.0 kg steel/FU + 0.45 kgCO2/kWh electric-
  ity × 19.7 kWh electricity + 3.67 kgCO2/kg oil × 2.3 kg oil + 2.80 kgCO2/L
  gas × 80.0 L gas + 0.01 kgCO2/kg steel landfilled × 10.0 kg steel land-
  filled = 253.9 kg CO2/FU

		 Use this calculation to determine the priority of each of the following
    ecodesign actions: recycling, extending lifetime, increasing motor effi-
    ciency, reducing component weight.
 5. Using Figure 4.3, discuss how these priorities can change depending on the
    distance traveled during the lifetime of the vehicle.


Exercise 6.4: Comparison of Two Front-End Panels
You are comparing two front-end panels for a car—one made out of aluminum and
one made out of steel.
Interpretation                                                                             195



  TABLE 6.11
  Midpoint Impacts for Pollutants Emitted to Air and Damage Factors
                                                           Midpoint Impacts
                                              Carcinogenic          Respiratory Inorganics
                                            Characterization          Characterization
  Pollutant               Emission (kg)   Factor (kgC2H3Cl-eq/kg)    Factor (kgPM2.5-eq/kg)
  NOx                          0.22                  0                        0.127
  PM2.5                       0.038                  0                          1
  SO2                          0.44                  0                        0.078
  Aromatic hydrocarbons      0.0041                3537                         0
  Dioxin (2,3,7,8 TCDD)    77.4 × 10–12         1.72 × 109                      0
                          Normalization
                             Factor                 Damage Factors by Category
                            (DALY/pt)      (DALY/kgC2H3Cl-eq)          (DALY/kgPM2.5-eq)
  Human health               0.0071             2.8 × 10 –6               7.0 × 10–4




   1. Figure 6.24 presents the probability distribution function of total primary
      energy use for the aluminum front-end panel. The median primary energy
      use is 2780 MJ/FU, and the GSD2 of this distribution is 1.6. What are the
      upper and lower limits of the 95% confidence interval?
   2. Figure 6.25 presents the frequency distribution of total primary energy use
      for the steel front-end panel. The median primary energy use is 4400 MJ/
      FU, and the upper and lower limits of the 95% confidence interval are 5060
      and 3830 MJ. Which scenario is better according to the information of
      Parts a and b—the steel or aluminum (notice the difference in the x-axis
      range)?
   3. Figure 6.26 shows the distribution of energy differences between the two
      scenarios (steel minus aluminum). The median energy difference between
      the two scenarios is 1620 MJ (i.e., steel uses 1620 MJ more than aluminum).
      Given the high uncertainty over the energy used for the two scenarios, one
      would expect the difference in energy between the scenarios to also be
      widely distributed. Why is the distribution of energy difference narrower
      than the distribution for each individual scenario? Using the information in
      the graph, describe how you could approximately calculate the probability
      that one scenario is better than the other (in two short sentences).

Exercise 6.5: Monte Carlo Analysis and Taylor Series Expansion
Instead of using a Monte Carlo analysis, you can use the Taylor series expansion
approach (Equation 6.3) to analytically calculate the uncertainty distributions of the
preceding exercises.
   The steel component requires 15.4 kg steel/FU for its manufacturing, with an
emission of 2.39 kg CO2/kg steel. Assume a GSD2 of 1.1 for these factors.
196                                                                                      Environmental Life Cycle Assessment


                                          0.2


         Probability distribution     0.15
              function (–)

                                          0.1


                                      0.05


                                                 0
                                                 2000 2500 3000 3500 4000 4500 5000 5500 6000 6500
                                                                                Primary energy (MJ/FU)


FIGURE 6.24 Probability distribution function of primary energy use for aluminum front-
end panel.



                                                                0.1
                                    Probability distribution




                                                               0.08
                                         function (–)




                                                               0.06

                                                               0.04

                                                               0.02

                                                                 0
                                                                 4000      4500      5000       5500         6000
                                                                               Primary energy (MJ/FU)


FIGURE 6.25 Probability distribution function of primary energy use for steel front-end
panel.



                                                      0.1
                      Probability distribution




                                                 0.08
                           function (–)




                                                 0.06

                                                 0.04

                                                 0.02

                                                               0
                                                               4000       4500          5000        5500         6000
                                                                        Difference in primary energy use (MJ/FU)


FIGURE 6.26 Probability distribution function of the difference in primary energy use for
the two scenarios.
Interpretation                                                                   197


   The fuel consumption per marginal weight change is further assumed to be equal
to 0.00004 l/kg-km over 200,000 km; thus, an 80 L gasoline consumption/FU
(assume GSD2 of 1.1), with an emission of 2.8 kgCO2/L gasoline, which is assumed
to have a higher uncertainty with a GSD2 of 1.77.

   1. Calculate sensitivities: Assume steel manufacturing and gasoline consump-
      tion are the only contributions to CO2 emissions over the life cycle of the
      front-end panel. Calculate the percentage contributions of manufacturing
      and gasoline consumption to the total front-end panel CO2 emissions. These
      percentages are equivalent to the sensitivities of the output results to the
      reference flow and emission factor input parameters for manufacturing and
      gasoline consumption.
   2. Use the four sensitivities calculated in Part a and the GSD2s provided above
      to calculate the GSD2 of the output, and compare this value to the result of
      Exercise 6.3a.
