      5         Life Cycle Impact
                Assessment
                Olivier Jolliet, Shanna Shaked,
                Myriam Saadé-Sbeih, Cécile Bulle,
                Alexandre Jolliet, and Pierre Crettaz

After gathering data on the raw material extractions and substance emissions associ-
ated with a product’s life cycle, the third phase of a life cycle assessment (LCA) is
the life cycle impact assessment (LCIA). The inventory determines the quantities
of materials and energy extracted, as well as the emissions to water, air, and soil.
But, how do we interpret this inventory data? How do we link these values to their
environmental impacts and compare the different impacts? The impact assessment
phase addresses these questions. The different steps of the impact assessment are
the classification of emissions into different impact categories, characterization of
midpoint impacts, and damage (end point) characterization. The impact assessment
methods are simple to apply, though their development can be relatively complex.
This chapter presents each LCIA step, as well as a concrete example of application.
Existing methods are then described in further detail. The developments needed to
improve these methods are presented in Section 5.6.

5.1 PURPOSE OF IMPACT ASSESSMENT
The inventory phase generally involves a first aggregation of data by summing emis-
sions of each substance and each resource extraction across the life cycle, result-
ing in an inventory table of total emissions and extractions for each substance and
resource. Even if one scenario has lower emissions of most substances, it generally
has higher emissions for several others. To determine which scenario is better, it
is then necessary to evaluate the magnitude of the impacts generated by each sub-
stance. Therefore, it is also necessary to have methods for aggregating emissions
according to their potential(s) to cause one or more environmental impacts.
    Due to the complex fate and exposure models needed to predict impacts of such a
wide variety of substances, the development of these environmental impact assessment
methods may involve complex models. Given the complexity of the task, some argue
that it is better to compare the results of different scenarios on the basis of the inven-
tory alone. But, considering only the inventory generally leads to an implicit weighting
in which approximately the same weight is given to each pollutant, or in which some
inventory flows are arbitrarily considered as more important. An impact assessment
based on consistent and explicit criteria is more appropriate than an implicit evalua-
tion, although the uncertainty is important to consider when analyzing results.

                                                                                      105
106                                            Environmental Life Cycle Assessment


    Various LCIA methods are available. Due to the many sources of uncertainty, and
the different specificities of each method, there is still no reference method used by
all LCA practitioners. To minimize bias in selecting and using an impact assessment
method, a general framework has been proposed, as well as a set of criteria to be
fulfilled (ISO 14044 2006; Udo de Haes et al. 2002; Jolliet et al. 2003a,b). Note that
while the development of impact assessment methods can be quite complex, their
application is usually trivial, since it consists of multiplying emissions by predefined
characterization factors.

5.2 PRINCIPLES OF IMPACT ASSESSMENT
5.2.1 General Principles
How can you compare lead emissions in water with chlorofluorocarbon (CFC) emis-
sions in air? How can you compare increases in human toxicity with contributions
to climate change? In other words, how can you compare apples and oranges? Some
would say that it is not apples and oranges, but apples and elephants—their impacts
are so different! These elements cannot be directly added, and an apple plus an
elephant does not equal two apple-elephants (Figure 5.1). But it is still possible to
compare an apple and an elephant by considering criteria to which they can both be
related. If you are concerned about the resistance of a floor, the weight or the weight
per square meter is a good criterion. In the case of an apple weighing about 0.2 kg
and an 8 t elephant, the elephant is equivalent to about 40,000 apples! Other equiva-
lencies can be defined from other perspectives and criteria, such as their nutritional
potential (in the unlikely case that an elephant is eaten) and the emissions of aromas
if we focus on odors!
   Which criteria should be used in an LCA to compare such different emissions and
resources? Since environmental LCAs are concerned with environmental impacts,
substances should be compared based on their capacity to damage the environment
and the health of humans. When a polluting substance is emitted to a certain envi-
ronmental medium, its concentration increases in that medium, and the substance
also often transfers to other environmental media (air, water, or soil), bioaccumulates
in the food chain, transforms into other substances, and is eventually ingested or
inhaled by humans or other species. It ultimately impacts either human health (HH)
or the quality of the environment. The path it follows is called the impact path-
way, which encompasses all the environmental processes from the substance emis-
sion to its final impact. The life cycle impact assessment methods model the impact




                                                ?

                                                ≠




FIGURE 5.1 How to compare an apple and an elephant?
Life Cycle Impact Assessment                                                                 107


                                                      Impact category
                                   LCI results
                                   assigned to          Category                 Category
          Life cycle                 impact             indicator                endpoints
          inventory                 category
            results
                                                                  Association of
                       Assigning             Quantitative
                                                                category indicator
                         LCI                  category
                                                                  with category
                        results               modeling
                                                                    endpoints


FIGURE 5.2 Impact assessment scheme to link inventory results with category end point
or damage to areas of protection. (ISO, ISO 14040 Environmental management—Life cycle
assessment—Principles and framework, 2006. With permission.)


pathways of different substances to link, as accurately as possible, each inventory
data to its potential environmental damage based on these pathways (Figure 5.2).
    Taking the example of global warming, the impact pathway includes the fol-
lowing steps: the greenhouse gas emissions generate a change in radiative forcing
(first-order effect), which causes an increase in temperature (second-order effect),
which has multiple effects including the rise of the sea level due to ice melting or
the increase in extreme weather events (third-order effect), which eventually lead to
damage to ecosystems and HH (fourth-order effect).

5.2.2 Methodological Framework: Midpoint and Damage Categories
To link the inventory data to environmental damage, a methodological framework
has been developed within the Life Cycle Initiative (Section 1.3, Jolliet et al. 2004).
First, all inventory results having similar effects (e.g., all the substance emissions
that contribute to the greenhouse effect) should be grouped into an impact category
at an intermediary level, called a midpoint category. For each midpoint category,
we define a midpoint indicator. Each inventory flow is multiplied by a character-
ization factor to characterize its contribution to that midpoint category. The term
midpoint expresses the fact that this point lies somewhere on the impact pathway
between the inventory results and the damages. Global warming, for example,
is a midpoint category representing the impact of greenhouse gases. The time-
integrated change in radiative forcing is typically taken as a midpoint indicator
and the contribution of each greenhouse gas to this change in radiative forcing is
characterized by a global warming potential, which serves as the characterization
factor, representing the contribution of each greenhouse gas emission relative to
CO2. However, others may instead use the increase in temperature as a midpoint
indicator.
   Each midpoint category is then allocated to one or more damage categories, which
address the damage to different areas of protection, such as HH and ecosystems. The
damage category is represented by a damage indicator, which is sometimes referred
to as an end point indicator. Because each impact assessment step generally involves
assumptions about how to characterize the damage contribution to the group, result
uncertainty increases as we move from inventory to midpoint and from midpoint to
108                                                  Environmental Life Cycle Assessment


                       Midpoint                                  Damage
                       categories                               categories
                     Human toxicity
                     Accidents                                 Human health
                     Noise
                     Creation of oxidizers
                                                               Natural biotic environment/
                     Ozone destruction
                                                               ecosystem quality
                     Climate change

                     Acidification

   LCI results       Eutrophication
                                                               Natural resources/
                     Ecotoxicity                               ecosystem services

                     Land-use impacts

                     Species and organism
                     dispersion                                Anthropogenic/
                                                               man-made environment
                     Natural resources
                        - minerals
                        - energy
                        - water
                        - soil (erosion, salinity)
                        - biotic resources usage


FIGURE 5.3 General structure of the UNEP-SETAC impact assessment framework. The
dotted arrows represent conversions from midpoint to damage categories that are particularly
uncertain. (Adapted from Jolliet, O., et al. International Journal of LCA, 9, 394–404, 2004.
With permission.)


damage results. On the other hand, each of these grouping steps yields results that
are easier to interpret. For example, a damage expressed in years of life lost is easier
to perceive and interpret than the quantity of a pollutant emitted.
   Figure 5.3 shows the general scheme of the methodological framework, which
links each inventory result to one or more damage categories through midpoint cat-
egories (Jolliet et al. 2004). The idea of this analytical framework is that the method
designer or its user can choose to stop at the midpoint level (Dutch handbook on LCA)
or to go all the way to the damage level (ReCiPe and IMPACT World+ methods).
Several impact assessment methods offer both options, as detailed in Sections 5.3
and 5.5).

5.2.3 Steps of Impact Assessment
Following the methodological framework described above, there are three steps in
impact assessment: classification of emissions, midpoint characterization, and dam-
age characterization.
Life Cycle Impact Assessment                                                          109


5.2.3.1 Classification
During this step, we define a set of midpoint environmental impact categories for
the types of environmental problems identified. Emissions are then classified into
any relevant midpoint categories on which they have an effect. For example, car-
bon dioxide (CO2), nitrous oxide (N2O), and methane (CH4) all contribute to global
warming impacts, whereas particulate matter (PM), nitrogen oxides (NOx), and sul-
fur dioxide (SO2) all contribute to impacts of respiratory inorganics (impacts of fine
particulate matter). A given substance can contribute to several impact categories,
such as methane, which contributes to both climate change and the creation of pho-
tochemical oxidants. The midpoint categories in Figure 5.3 provide suggestions for
potential impacts to consider, but this list is not comprehensive, and can be simpli-
fied or adjusted to match the application.

5.2.3.2 Midpoint Characterization
During midpoint characterization, emissions and extractions are weighted to repre-
sent their contribution to each midpoint category. These weighting factors are called
midpoint characterization factors, and they express the relative importance of sub-
stance emissions (or extractions) in the context of a specific midpoint environmental
impact category. These factors must be modeled and quantified in a scientifically
valid and coherent manner. The inventory flows, emissions, or extractions (ui in, e.g.,
kgi/FU) are multiplied by these factors, and then summed in each midpoint category
                                  midpoint
m to provide a midpoint score (Sm          in, e.g., kgCO2-eq/FU) (Equation 5.1):

                               Smmidpoint =   ∑ (CF
                                               i
                                                   midpoint
                                                   m,i    u i   )                    (5.1)


where:
       midpoint
   CFm,i         (in, e.g., kgCO2-eq/kgi) is the midpoint characterization factor of sub-
                  stance i in the midpoint category m
   ui		is the emitted or extracted mass of substance i per functional unit as
                  given in the inventory

                           midpoint
   The midpoint score Sm         is often expressed in units of equivalent mass of a
reference substance.
   For example, all emissions of greenhouse gases (CO2, CH4, NO2, etc.) may be
expressed as equivalent emissions of CO2, based on how much 1 kg contributes to
the greenhouse effect relative to 1 kg of CO2.
   For the global warming category, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change (IPCC) provides characterization factors for greenhouse gases, called
global warming potentials. Since these gases stay in the atmosphere for varying
amounts of time, the global warming potential of a substance depends on the
“time horizon” considered (Table 5.1). A 100-year integration over the impact of a
greenhouse substance is commonly used in LCA, but this does not reflect the full
impact caused over the lifetime of the substance. CO2, for example, has an effec-
tive residence time of more than 100 years and thus contributes more to global
110                                                   Environmental Life Cycle Assessment



TABLE 5.1
Global Warming Potentials
                                                                           Global Warming Potential
Industrial
                                                                            for Given Time Horizon
Designation                                       Radiative
                                                                                  (kgCO2-eq/kgi)
or Common          Chemical       Lifetime        Efficiency
Name               Formula         (years)       (W/m2/ ppb)        20-year       100-year    500-year
Carbon dioxide       CO2         See below       1.4E × 10 −5                1         1          1
Methane              CH4             12           3.7 × 10−4                72        25          7.6
Nitrous oxide        N2O            114          3.03 × 10−3               289       298        153

Substances Controlled by the Montreal Protocol
CFC-11              CCl3F          45               0.25             6,730          4,750     1,620
CFC-12             CCl2F2         100               0.32            11,000         10,900     5,200
CFC-13              CClF3         640               0.25            10,800         14,400    16,400
CFC-113         CCl2FCClF2         85                0.3             6,540          6,130     2,700
CFC-114         CClF2CClF2        300               0.31             8,040         10,000     8,730
CFC-115           CClF2CF3       1700               0.18             5,310          7,370     9,990

Source: IPCC. Climate Change 2007: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerabilit, Contribution of Working
        Group II to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change,
        Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 2007.




warming over a 500-year time horizon. Table 5.2 illustrates how Equation 5.1 can
be applied to the steel front-end panel inventory flows discussed in the Chapter 4
case study (Table 4.6). We can thus characterize the global warming midpoint
score in equivalent kilograms of CO2 (kgCO2-eq) and express the respiratory
effects of particulates in equivalent kilograms of particulate matter smaller than
2.5 microns (kgPM2.5-eq).

5.2.3.3 Damage Characterization: Getting from Midpoint to Damage
In damage characterization, we assess the contribution of each midpoint category
to one or more damage categories associated with broad areas of protection. Just
as each polluting substance contributes to one or more midpoint categories, each
midpoint impact may contribute to one or more damage categories. To quantify this
contribution, we multiply the midpoint impact score of a category by the midpoint-
to-damage characterization factor (MDFd,m, e.g., in DALY/kgPM2.5-eq) (where DALY
refers to disability-adjusted life years), which estimates the damage to the area of
protection d caused per unit of the midpoint reference substance of category m. The
                                                          damage
damage characterization score in damage category d, Sd           (e.g., in DALY/FU), is
then obtained by summation (Equation 5.2):

                               Sddamage =   ∑ MDF × S
                                             m
                                                     d,m
                                                                midpoint
                                                                m
                                                                                                  (5.2)
Life Cycle Impact Assessment                                                                          111



        TABLE 5.2
        Determination of the Midpoint Impact Scores of the Steel
        Front-End Panel for the Global Warming and the Respiratory
        Inorganics (PM Effects) Midpoint Impact Categories Using
        the Characterization Factors of IMPACT World+
                         Inventory                  Midpoint
                         Emissions              Characterization                Midpoint Impact
                            (bi)                Factor (CF midpoint)             Score (Smidpoint)

        (a) Global Warming
        Units           kgi/FU                        kgCO2-eq/kgi                 kgCO2-eq/FU
        CO2              253.9                            1                          253.9
        CH4               0.15                            25                          3.8
        N2O             0.0013                           298                          0.4
        Total                                                                        258.1

        (b) Respiratory Inorganics (Fine Particulate Matter)
        Units             kgi/FU               kgPM2.5/kgi                         kgPM2.5/FU
        PM10              0.0383                  0.6                                0.023
        NOx                0.221                0.0077                              0.0017
        SO2                0.439                 0.038                               0.017
        Other                                                                       0.0003
        Total                                                                        0.042

        Note: Subscript i indicates the different substances.


   For example, the HH damage is a sum of the damages caused by respiratory
effects of particulate matter, the HH impacts of global warming, and the impacts of
other HH-related midpoint categories such as carcinogens and photochemical oxi-
dants. Table 5.7 provides the midpoint-to-damage characterization factors for the
IMPACT World+ method, expressed in damage per unit of the reference substance
of each category. As an example, Table 5.3 shows how to calculate the damage to HH
of the steel front-end panel, based on the midpoint scores determined in Table 5.2.
   Damage scores can also be directly calculated from the inventory results ui
(Equation 5.3) by combining the midpoint and damage characterization steps for
each midpoint impact category m to yield the damage characterization factor for
                                        damage
substance i in damage category d (CFd,i        in, e.g., DALY/kgi) (Equation 5.4):

                                  Sddamage =    ∑ (CF
                                                  i
                                                             damage
                                                            d,i     iu   )                           (5.3)


where

                            CFd,idamage =   ∑ MDF × CF
                                            m
                                                          d,m
                                                                     midpoint
                                                                     m,i
                                                                                                     (5.4)
112                                                   Environmental Life Cycle Assessment



TABLE 5.3
Determination of the Damage Impact Scores on Human Health of the Steel
Front-End Panel, Using the Midpoint-to-Damage Characterization Factor of
IMPACT World+ Provided in Table 5.7
                                        Midpoint Score         Midpoint-to-    Damage Impact
                                       (Smidpoint) kgj-eq/FU     Damage         Score (Sdamage)
                                                               Factor(MDF)        DALY/FU
                                                                 DALY/kgi
Global warming          kgCO2-eq              258.1               8.3E–7          0.00021
 (<100 years)
PM: respiratory         kgPM2.5-eq            0.042              0.00083         0.000035
 inorganics
Other                                                                             0.00088
                                       Total damage score SdamageHH (DALY/        0.00113
                                        FU)
Normalization       0.022 DALY/        Normalized damage score (person-year/       0.051
 factor NHH          person-year        FU)
Weighting factor    €74,000/DALY       Weighted damage score (€/FU)                  84
 wHH

Note: IMPACT World+ normalized score and weighted score calculated according to stepwise method
      (Weidema 2009).




   Nevertheless, it is often useful to keep the contributions of each of the midpoint
categories separated for interpretation.
   The calculation of the damage score involves more uncertainties than for the mid-
point scores, but is still based on scientifically determined or estimated values and a
shared damage category; thus, it should not be considered as a value-based weight-
ing as defined by ISO 14044.

5.2.3.4 Optional Steps: Normalization, Grouping, and Weighting
In addition to the three steps defined in the previous subsections, the impact assess-
ment may include three optional steps to aid interpretation and the drawing of con-
clusions: normalization, grouping, and weighting (Finnveden et al. 2002).

5.2.3.4.1 Normalization
The reference units of many midpoint categories, and some damage categories, are
often not initially intuitive, and the meanings of the resulting impacts are thus dif-
ficult to interpret. The normalization step expresses a given impact per functional
unit relative to the total impact in that category to better understand the magnitude
of the damage. It thus compares the respective contribution of the considered product
or service to the current total effect on a global, continental, or regional level for a
given category (midpoint or damage). The results of the impact characterization are
reported relative to these total reference values or normalization values.
Life Cycle Impact Assessment                                                           113


   We recommend normalizing the damage rather than the midpoint score because
midpoint normalization only indicates the relative magnitude of the contribution
within that midpoint category, lacking the midpoint-to-damage information about
the importance of that midpoint category in the total impacts. The normalized score
                           damage
in the damage category d, Sd−normalized , in, for example, person-year/FU, is expressed
as (Equation 5.5)


                                   damage           Sddamage
                                  Sd−normalized =                                     (5.5)
                                                       Nd


where:
    damage
  Sd−normalized is the damage score
   Nd (in, e.g., DALY/person-year) is the normalization value of damage category
         d, which is the total damage of the current total emissions and extractions
         within damage category d

   This total damage is calculated by multiplying the total annual global, conti-
nental, or national emissions or extractions in the region r (uitotal,r in, e.g., kgCO2-eq/
year) by their respective midpoint or damage characterization factors and dividing
this by the total population P in the considered region (Ptotal,r, person) to get a nor-
malized score per person. The normalized value for damage category d, Nd, is thus
(Equation 5.6)


                                    ∑ (CF   damage
                                            m,i       × ui total,r   )
                             Nd =    i
                                                                                      (5.6)
                                              Ptotal,r


   These expressions can be rearranged in various ways to directly calculate the
normalized damage scores from normalized characterization factors and inventory
results. The normalized score expresses the relative contribution of the considered
functional unit to the total damage per person in that category, at the global, conti-
nental, or regional level. By default, IMPACT World+ provides global normalization
scores for the entire world, putting the impacts of the functional unit in the perspec-
tive of total global impacts.

5.2.3.4.2 Grouping
Grouping is a qualitative or semiquantitative process that helps prioritize results
by sorting or ranking, and can be done in several ways. Impact categories can be
grouped according to area of protection, the types of emissions/resources, or by
spatial scale (global, regional, or local). Impact categories can also be ranked based
on a predefined hierarchy; for example, high, medium, and low priority. This second
procedure is based on value choices that reflect the importance given by society or
the user to a particular category.
114                                             Environmental Life Cycle Assessment


5.2.3.4.3 Weighting
Rather than have multiple scores for each scenario, for every midpoint or damage
category, some users just want a single score for each scenario, which is calculated
by weighting the scores in each damage category based on its relative social value.
Applying these weighting factors to each damage category (Equation 5.7) leads to
a final aggregation into a single weighted environmental impact score (Sweighted in
$/FU):


                              Sweighted =   ∑w × S
                                            d
                                                d
                                                    damage
                                                    d                            (5.7)


where wd is the weighting factor of damage category d (in, e.g., $/DALY).
   It is recommended to only apply this weighting to the damage characteriza-
tion, since the midpoint-to-damage factor already provides an effective natural
science–based characterization of midpoint categories (in contrast to weighting,
which is value-based) that contribute to a given area of protection (e.g., HH, ecosys-
tem quality, ecosystem services and resources).
   Weighting factors are based on social, political, and ethical values and cannot be
estimated only using only natural science–based methods. Science is not capable of
assessing, for example, the value of a year of life lost compared with the value of
an extinct species in a given time and space. The methods that define these factors
are thus generally based on monetization, surveys, or distance-to-target approaches:

   • Monetization encompasses all methods that estimate weighting factors on
     a monetary basis. One of the most common approaches is to base these
     factors on the “willingness to pay” (i.e., what people are willing to pay to
     avoid a given damage). However, monetary values are not necessarily all
     additive and comparable. Weidema (2009) proposes the stepwise approach,
     which enables the practitioner to weight damages to HH, ecosystems, and
     resources for the IMPACT World+ or ReCiPe methods.
   • Surveys of experts or samples of the population can also provide weighting
     factors based on questionnaires that reveal the perceived relative impor-
     tance of damage, impact categories, or interventions (Finnveden et al.
     2002). Eco-indicator 99 used this approach for its weighting factors.
   • The distance-to-target approach links the weighting factors to a target
     value, based on policy environmental goals.

   Finnveden et al. (2002) provide more details regarding good practice for choosing
a particular weighting method based on the available data and study objectives. Since
such weighting requires incorporating choices based on social, political, and ethical
values (Finnveden 1997), it remains a debated element of LCA, especially in the
context of industrial applications. Itsubo et al. (2012) recently provided interesting
insights into global weighting factors, based on surveys in multiple countries. They
show that developed countries tend to give more importance to ecosystem damage
compared with developing regions, in which HH is the main emphasis.
Life Cycle Impact Assessment                                                         115


   Once the total damage score is calculated, Table 5.3 (bottom) shows how the
IMPACT World+ normalization factors and the stepwise weighting factors are used
to calculate the normalized and weighted damage scores.


5.2.4 Uncertainties and Use of Evaluation Methods of Impact
Moving from inventory to impact assessment increases the ability to interpret results,
but also introduces more uncertainties, which means that differences must be greater
than a minimum value to be considered significant.
    As discussed in Section 6.5 on uncertainties, a difference of less than 10% is gen-
erally not considered significant for energy use or CO2 emissions. The impact cat-
egories of respiratory inorganics, acidification, and eutrophication must have scores
that differ by greater than 30% to be significant.
    Toxicity categories generally require a difference of more than one order of mag-
nitude to be considered significant, especially if each scenario has a different domi-
nant toxic emission, or if the toxicity is due to long-term landfill emissions, which
can be very uncertain. Individual characterization factors are considered substan-
tially different when they differ by more than three orders of magnitude (Rosenbaum
et al. 2008); this is large, but still limited compared with variations of over 12 orders
of magnitude across different substances. Rather than use preliminary toxicity
scores as ultimate rankings of dominating pollutants, they are better at identifying
the chemicals that contribute to more than a certain percentage of the total score
(e.g., 1%). Analysts can thus identify 10–30 chemicals to be considered in priority
order and ignore the hundreds of other substances.
    The following section presents a practical example to show how to use an impact
assessment method.


5.3 APPLICATION EXAMPLE OF THE IMPACT WORLD+
     METHOD: FRONT-END PANEL OF AN AUTOMOBILE
The application of a method to assess the impacts of a product or functional unit
consists of a series of multiplications by midpoint and damage characterization
factors, possibly followed by normalization values and weights. Several impact
assessment methods exist and are reviewed in further detail in Sections 5.4 and
5.5. We first apply one such method here, IMPACT World+, to demonstrate such
an application. By applying the IMPACT World+ method to the case of automo-
tive components addressed in the previous chapter (Section 4.2.3), this section
helps the user understand the operation and use of a method for analyzing the
impact.


5.3.1 Analysis of Inventory Results
The inventory of emissions and extractions (Table 4.6) presents the quantities of
substances emitted and extracted for four scenarios concerning automobile front-end
panels. Though most inventory flows of the steel scenario are higher, no scenario
116                                          Environmental Life Cycle Assessment


has all the emissions and extractions at the highest or lowest values, so the inven-
tory results alone do not directly enable ranking the environmental performance of
the four front-end panels considered. It is therefore essential to have an analytical
method to compare the impact and put into perspective the importance of these dif-
ferent emissions and extractions.

5.3.2 General IMPACT World+ Framework and Classification
The detailed emission inventory of emissions and extractions (Table 4.6) are clas-
sified into midpoint and damage categories according to Figure 5.4. The impact
assessment accounts for all 500 calculated emissions and extractions, even those not
listed in Table 4.6.
    As a midpoint and damage impact assessment method, IMPACT World+ first
applies midpoint characterization factors to determine impacts at midpoint levels.
IMPACT World+ accounts for 30 midpoint indicators, which are typically regrouped
into 10–15 categories for more comprehensible results. While they can be reported
and interpreted separately, IMPACT World+ puts these impacts into perspective by
calculating the damage of each midpoint impact on any of the three areas of protec-
tion: HH, ecosystem quality, and ecosystem services and resources. The latter area
of protection includes the impacts to human society that have no direct health con-
sequences, such as abiotic (nonliving) resource use and depreciation of ecosystem
services. Acknowledging that some users may want to freely select impact categories


                 Groups of midpoint                                                          Damage
                                                          (optional
                 categories                                                                  or end point
                                                          reporting
                                                          categories)
   Outputs            Human toxicity
                                                                                                  Human
  Pesticide        Photochem. oxidation                                                            health
   PM2.5
    Cu             Ozone layer depletion
    CO2               Global warming
                                                            Climate change

                                                                             Water impacts




 Phosphate
    ...                 Ecotoxicity
                                                                                                Ecosystem
                       Acidification                                                               quality
      Inputs
 Water well           Eutrophication
 Arable land
  Crude oil             Water use
  Iron ore               Land use
     ...                                                                                   Resources and
                       Resource use                                                    ecosystem services
 And hundreds
 more...


FIGURE 5.4 The IMPACT World+ global framework, from inventory flows to damage to
areas of protections.
Life Cycle Impact Assessment                                                               117


of particular interest, optional grouping can be made for reporting purposes, separat-
ing out the impacts associated with climate change (e.g., carbon footprint) or water
(water footprint) without double counting.

5.3.3 Midpoint Characterization of Front-End Panel Scenarios
                                                                                midpoint
Within each midpoint category, the midpoint characterization factor (CFm,i        ) is
used to convert the emitted or extracted substance amount to the equivalent reference
substance amount for that category (Figure 5.4). Taking the example of greenhouse
gases (Table 5.1), the reference substance is CO2, and the carbon footprint (CF) of
methane (CH4) is its global warming potential of 25, which means that 1 kg of meth-
ane is equivalent to 25 kg of CO2.
   The global warming score of each front-end panel is obtained by multiplying the
inventory emissions of each greenhouse gas (Table 4.6) by their global warming
potentials and then summing over the product for each substance (Table 5.2a). The
same calculations are made for impacts of particulate matter (Table 5.2b), as well as
every other midpoint category.
   At the midpoint level, the score of each scenario can be expressed as a
percentage of the score of the highest scenario in the category (Figure 5.5). The
steel panel generates the highest impact in most midpoint categories, except for
aquatic ecotoxicity and ionizing radiation, for which the virgin aluminum sce-
nario dominates (Figure 5.5). The “recycled aluminum” scenario generally has
the lowest scores, except in the aquatic eutrophication, noncarcinogenic effects,
and ionizing radiation categories, where the “composite” front-end panel has the
lowest impacts.



      100%
                                                                        Steel
       80%

       60%                                                              Composite

       40%
                                                                        Aluminum
       20%

        0%                                                              Recycled
                                                                        aluminum
                         pl n
             al ene tion
                      ur se

       ua al a ate se
      ar eu ific se


       sp tic ic n




                  Ca rga s
                        in s
      Re tor oto on

                 to rga y




       zo zin in s
    M Fos ccu ing




              lay rad ens


                                 n
        Aq utr hic n




                       o ic
            N rc nic

    O oni arc gen
             ira o it




                      de io
    Re ua oph atio




                              io
            e e p io
   M tic cid r u
                   so y u

   Aq tri W s u




          sp y i xic
                              i


                    ry n
                    o rm




                  er iat
          ira ec at




                           et
         in tro at




          ne g og
                           a




                          o
                         ce
                re rg
       in sil p
               nd a
           L a al w




                     n




          I nc
                  b
               lo




               o
            G




          er


        es
      rr
   Te




FIGURE 5.5 Comparison of the midpoint characterization scores for the four front-end
panels, according to IMPACT World+.
118                                                                             Environmental Life Cycle Assessment


5.3.4 Damage Characterization of Front-End Panel Scenarios
The IMPACT World+ method characterizes aggregated damage in three categories:

     1. Impacts on HH include global warming, water use, respiratory effects, car-
        cinogenic and noncarcinogenic effects, ionizing radiation, and the destruc-
        tion of the stratospheric ozone layer. Table 5.3 gives an example of how to
        calculate damage scores for global warming and particulate matter effects
        on HH.
     2. Impacts on ecosystem quality include the effects on terrestrial ecosystems
        (acidification and land use), on aquatic ecosystems (marine acidification,
        ecotoxicity, ionizing radiation, as well as freshwater and marine eutrophi-
        cation of water), and the effect of global warming on ecosystems.
     3. Resource use includes the extraction of minerals and nonrenewable energy.
        Due to the uncertainties at damage level, results are displayed on a log scale
        to avoid overinterpreting small differences among scenarios.

    For the HH impacts, Figure 5.6 shows that in the case of these four front-end
panel scenarios, the impacts due to respiratory organics (also called photooxidant
formation), ionizing radiation, and ozone layer depletion are two to three orders
of magnitude less than other HH impacts. This is common in many assessments
and consistent with a systematic analysis carried out by Bulle et al. (2013) for the
4000+ ecoinvent processes.
    An important and influential value is the time horizon to consider when calcu-
lating impacts. If one only considers impacts over the next 100 years, this reduces
impacts by close to an order of magnitude for global warming and carcinogens (bot-
tom of error bars).
    Since damage scores have an uncertainty of at least two orders of magnitude,
these results suggest that only five categories need to be considered for hotspot

                                   1E+00
  Human health impacts (DALY/FU)




                                                                                                        Steel
                                   1E–01
                                   1E–02
                                                                                                        Composite
                                   1E–03
                                   1E–04
                                                                                                        Aluminum
                                   1E–05
                                   1E–06
                                                                                                        Recycled
                                   1E–07                                                                aluminum
                                   1E–08
                                                                                              n
                                                         s



                                                                                               s


                                                                                             cs



                                                                                               s
                                            g




                                                                                              s




                                                                                              n
                                                       ct



                                                                                            ic




                                                                                           en



                                                                                           en
                                            in




                                                                                          tio



                                                                                           io
                                                                                          ni
                                                                                        an
                                                     pa
                                           m




                                                                                        et
                                                                                       og



                                                                                       og
                                                                                      ga




                                                                                       ia
                                                                                     rg




                                                                                     pl
                                        ar


                                                   im




                                                                                    ad
                                                                                    in



                                                                                    in
                                                                                   or




                                                                                 de
                                                            no
                                       lw




                                                                                 rc



                                                                                 rc



                                                                                  r
                                                 se




                                                                               ry




                                                                              ng
                                                                             Ca
                                                          yi




                                                                              ca




                                                                              er
                                    ba


                                               ru




                                                                            to




                                                                          on




                                                                         lay
                                                                           zi
                                                             r
                                   lo




                                                          to


                                                                        ira
                                               e




                                                                        ni
                                   G



                                            at




                                                                       N
                                                       ira




                                                                      ne
                                                                     sp




                                                                     Io
                                           W


                                                     sp




                                                                   zo
                                                                  Re
                                                   Re




                                                                 O




FIGURE 5.6 Comparison of the damage on human health for the four front-end panels,
according to IMPACT World+. Error bars represent impacts occurring after 100 years.
Life Cycle Impact Assessment                                                                                                    119


(preliminary and targeted) analysis: global warming, carcinogens and noncarcino-
gens, respiratory inorganics (or particulate matter), and water use.
    Mineral, fossil, and water use are modeled based on an extraction–consumption–
competition–adaptation approach, meaning that on top of accounting for resource
extraction, the impacts also account for resource consumption, competition, and
adaptation. Boulay et al. (2011a,b) modeled this cause–effect chain for water use
up to HH damage. For the water-use category, impacts may depend on the region
considered for the analysis, and the method applied here represents a global default.
If the analysis occurs in a developed country, adaptation capacity renders the impact
negligible. However, in a region with high water scarcity and low income, water-use
impacts will be higher than in this default calculation, as discussed by Boulay et al.
(2015) for a laundry and detergent case study. Comparison of the four front-end
panels shows that the recycled aluminum scenario ranks better or equal to other
scenarios in all relevant categories, whereas the steel panel, due to its larger weight
and higher associated emissions while driving, leads to the highest impact on HH.
    For ecosystem damage impacts, Figure 5.7 shows that global warming and ocean
acidification are correlated and half an order of magnitude larger than most other
impacts, which are relatively similar in magnitude. Ionizing radiation is negligible.
Land occupation has low impacts compared with other categories, because this
transportation case study does not involve land-use intensive processes in its system
boundaries.
    In ranking the ecosystem impacts of each scenario, the recycled aluminum sce-
nario ranks better or equal to the other scenarios in all relevant categories. The steel
scenario ranks worst on all ecosystem impacts except water use, for which aluminum
manufacturing is worst.


                                              1×103
   Ecosystem/ biodiversity (PDF-m2-year/FU)




                                              1×102                                                                  Steel

                                              1×101
                                                                                                                     Composite
                                              1×100

                                              1×10–1
                                                                                                                     Aluminum
                                              1×10–2

                                              1×10–3                                                                 Recycled
                                                                                                                     aluminum
                                              1×10–4
                                                                                                                 n
                                                                           n


                                                                                                                se




                                                                                                                 n


                                                                                                                 n
                                                         g


                                                                  n




                                                                                                               ity
                                                                                                                 n
                                                        in




                                                                                                              io
                                                                          tio




                                                                                                            tio


                                                                                                              io
                                                                io




                                                                                                              io
                                                                                                           ru




                                                                                                            ic
                                                       m




                                                                                                           at
                                                                                                           at
                                                               at




                                                                                                           at
                                                                        pa




                                                                                                         ca




                                                                                                        ox
                                                                                    e




                                                                                                        di
                                                                                                        ic
                                                              fic
                                                    ar




                                                                                                       fic
                                                                                 at




                                                                                                     hi
                                                                      cu




                                                                                                     ot
                                                                                                    ph




                                                                                                    ra
                                                  lw


                                                              di




                                                                                                    di
                                                                                W




                                                                                                  op




                                                                                                 ec
                                                                    oc




                                                                                                ro
                                                           ci




                                                                                                 ci




                                                                                                ng
                                                ba




                                                                                               tr
                                                         ea




                                                                                              la




                                                                                             tic
                                                                                             ut
                                                                   nd




                                                                                             zi
                                                                                            eu
                                               lo




                                                                                           ia




                                                                                         ee




                                                                                          ni
                                                         in




                                                                                         ua
                                              G




                                                                La




                                                                                        tr


                                                                                       tic




                                                                                       Io
                                                       ar




                                                                                     Aq
                                                                                      in
                                                                                es


                                                                                    ua
                                                    M




                                                                                    ar
                                                                              rr

                                                                                  Aq


                                                                                  M
                                                                            Te




FIGURE 5.7 Comparison of the damage impacts on ecosystem quality for the four front-
end panels, according to IMPACT World+. Error bars represent impacts occurring after
100 years.
120                                                                                                                                                                            Environmental Life Cycle Assessment


   For impacts on ecosystem services and resources (not shown), the ranking for the
subcategory “fossil resources” is similar to the midpoint results (Figure 5.5). This still
interim fossil resources category of IMPACT World+ differentiates the energy vectors
as a function of the marginal reduction in the availability of a nonrenewable resource
(Fatemi et al. 2013), yielding, for example, a lower cost for coal ($5 × 10 –4/MJ) com-
pared with petroleum resources ($5 × 10 –3/MJ); it is still undergoing testing.

5.3.5 Normalization of Front-End Panel Scenarios
Damage scores can be normalized using the global total scores in each damage cat-
egory: 0.022 DALY/person-year of HH damage; 8,500 PDF-m2-year/person-year of
ecosystem quality damage; and 63,100 MJ/person-year or $315/person-year in eco-
system services and resources, assuming a future increase in energy price due to
resource scarcity of $5 × 10 –3/MJ. The bottom of Table 5.3 illustrates for the steel
front-end panel how the normalized impacts on HH are calculated.
   Figure 5.8 shows the normalized damage score of each scenario in each damage
category, which can be interpreted as the contribution of the functional unit com-
pared with the annual impact of a person on HH, ecosystem, or energy resources.
The impacts on HH and ecosystems due to global warming can be distinguished
from other impacts. About two-thirds of the HH and ecosystem impacts occur after
100 years, but the ranking among scenarios remains independent of time horizon.
The recycled aluminum scenario has the lowest impact in all categories, and the steel
leads to the highest impacts.
   Despite normalized scores all being expressed in the same unit, they should not
be summed across areas of protection. Doing so implies a default weight of 1 to
each area of protection, which would mean that the total global impacts on HH,


                                            0.07
      Normalized impacts (person–year/FU)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Energy resources
                                            0.06

                                            0.05                                                                                                                                                                           EQ global warming
                                            0.04
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Ecosystem quality (excl. GW)
                                            0.03

                                            0.02                                                                                                                                                                           HH global warming

                                            0.01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Human health (excl. GW)
                                              0
                                                                                                                                                                   Steel ER
                                                   Steel HH
                                                              Composite HH




                                                                                                           Steel EQ
                                                                                           Recycled AlHH



                                                                                                                      Composite EQ


                                                                                                                                                   Recycled AlEQ




                                                                                                                                                                                                           Recycled AlER
                                                                                                                                                                              Composite ER
                                                                                                                                                                                             Aluminum ER
                                                                             Aluminum HH




                                                                                                                                     Aluminum EQ




FIGURE 5.8 Comparison of the normalized damage scores of the four front-end panels
for human health (HH), ecosystem quality (EQ), and resource and ecosystem services (RE),
according to IMPACT World+. Error bars represent impacts occurring after 100 years.
Life Cycle Impact Assessment                                                                                   121


ecosystem quality, and ecosystem services and resources are all considered equiva-
lent. The next section discusses potential weighting schemes.

5.3.6 Weighting of Impacts for Front-End Panel
To compare the overall impact of different scenarios, it is sometimes desirable to
aggregate the damage scores of all areas of protection into a single indicator. To
do so, we must weigh the damage scores as a function of their relative importance.
IMPACT World+ does not provide standardized weights, leaving the user to select
their own factors. IMPACT World+ can, however, be coupled with the economic
weighting factors of Weidema (2009), which are as follows: €74,000/DALY for HH,
€0.14/PDF-m2-year for ecosystem quality, and €0.86/$ for resources.
   For the steel front-end panel, the last row of Table 5.3 illustrates the calculation of
the weighted HH damage. Applying this approach to the other three scenarios and
summing over all three areas of protection, our case study yields the single weighted
scores in Figure 5.9. This confirms that recycled aluminum has the lowest impact
and steel the highest, with aluminum and composite being intermediary.

5.4                          OVERVIEW OF THE MAIN IMPACT ASSESSMENT METHODS
On the one hand, the example of applying an impact assessment to the front-end
panel in Section 5.3 demonstrates that the application of these methods is relatively
straightforward. On the other, because of the potential breadth and complexity of
impact assessment methods and the many possible applications, there is still no
single consensus method. This section presents an overview of the major impact
assessment methods (Table 5.4) and their historical development, with more details
on each method in Section 5.5. More information on each method is available via the
UNEP-SETAC Life Cycle Initiative website (Appendix I).


                            140
                                                                                     Energy resources
                            120
  Weighted impacts (€/FU)




                            100                                                      EQ global warming

                            80
                                                                                     Ecosystem quality (excl. GW)
                            60

                            40                                                       HH global warming


                            20
                                                                                     Human health (excl. GW)
                             0
                                  Steel   Composite   Aluminum   Recycled aluminum


FIGURE 5.9 Single weighted damage score for each of the four front-end panels, account-
ing for human health, ecosystem quality, and resource and ecosystem services, according to
IMPACT World+. Error bars present results occurring after 100 years.
                                                                                                                                                                                  122




TABLE 5.4
Key Characteristics of the Main Impact Assessment Methods
                                            Ecological           Dutch
                                              Scarcity        Handbook on                      IMPACT 2002+       LIME (Itsubo       ReCiPe          EU-LCA          IMPACT
                                          (Frischknecht       LCA (Guinée      TRACI (Bare      (Jolliet et al.    and Inaba,      (Goedkoop       (Hauschild     World+ (Bulle
Methods                                 et al. 2008; 2013)    et al., 2001)    et al. 2003)       2003a,b)           2003)         et al. 2009)    et al. 2013)    et al. 2013)
Evaluation level                        Policy objectives    Midpoint         Midpoint         Midpoint and       Midpoint and   Midpoint and     Midpoint and    Midpoint and
                                                                                                damage             damage         damage           damage          damage
Normalization and weighting             Both based on        Normalization    Normalization of Normalization of Normalization    Both (default    Normalization World
                                         actual                                damage for       damage.          and Japanese     weighting: 0.4   not yet       normalization.
                                         environmental                         United States    Weighting up     weighting        human health;    available     Stepwise
                                         flows and policy                                       to user                           0.4 ecosystems;                weighting
                                         objectives                                                                               0.2 resources)                 (Weidema
                                                                                                                                                                 2009) optional
Covered        Global warming                    X                  X               X                 X                X                X               X               X
 midpoint      Oceanic acidification                                                                                                    ?                               X
 categories    Stratospheric ozone                                  X               X                 X                X                X               X               X
                depletion
               Human health impacts              X                  X               X                 X                X                X               X               X
                of particulate and
                toxics
               Indoor and worker                                                                                                                                        X
                impacts
               Accidents                                            X
               Ionizing radiation                X                  X                                 X                                 X              Xa               X
               Photooxidant formation            X                  X               X                 X                X                X               X               X
                                                                                                                                                                                  Environmental Life Cycle Assessment
                Acidification                      X                   X                  X                 X                X                 X                X               X
                Eutrophication                     X                   X                  X                 X                X                                  X               X
                Ecotoxicity                        X                   X                  X                 X                X                 X                X               X
                Land use                           X                   X                                    X                X                 X                X               X
                Energy use                         X                   X                  X                 X                X                 X                X               X
                Mineral extraction                                                                          X                X                 X                X               X
                Water use                          Xb                                                       X                                                   X               X
                Soil quality                                                                                                                                                    X
                Use of biotic resources                                X                                                     X                                                 (X)
Covered         Human health                                                              X                 X                X                 X                X               X
 damage         Natural biotic                                                            X                 X                X                 X                X               X
                                                                                                                                                                                     Life Cycle Impact Assessment




 categories      environment
                 (ecosystems)
                Natural abiotic resources                                                 X                 X                X                 X                X               X
                Natural biotic resources                                                                                     X                                                 (X)
                 (e.g., tuna)
                Man-made biotic                                                                                              X
                 resources (e.g., crops)
                Man-made abiotic
                 resources (e.g.,
                 buildings)

a   Including effects on ecosystems.
b   Based on Frischknecht, R., Steiner, R. and Jungbluth, N. (2008). The Ecological Scarcity Method: Eco-Factors 2006, Umwelt-Wissen Nr. 0906, Bundesamt für Umwelt (BAFU), Bern.
                                                                                                                                                                                     123
124                                           Environmental Life Cycle Assessment


    One of the first LCA impact assessment methods was the critical volumes method
(Bus 1984), which took the first step of grouping emissions by emission compart-
ment (air, water, and soil). This method does not account for the persistence or fate
of pollutants and is therefore no longer valid. CML 92 (Heijungs 1992) was the first
method to focus on the effects of emissions, and has thus been the basis for many
further developments. Fate, however, was not accounted for in the evaluation of tox-
ics, as it followed an approach similar to that of the critical volumes method. To
overcome this deficiency, Huijbregts (1999) recalculated the impacts of toxics by
considering the fate of pollutants, and these calculations have been integrated into
the midpoint characterization method described in the Dutch handbook on life cycle
assessment (Guinée et al. 2002).
    Already, 20 years ago, the Environmental Priorities Strategy (EPS) method
(Ryding et al. 1993; Steen 1996) suggested assessing impacts in terms of damage. It
had an excellent analytical framework, but the basis of coefficient calculations was
sometimes not very transparent. It was thus updated by Steen (1999), giving rise to
the EPS 2000d method.
    Eco-indicator 95 (Goedkoop 1995) and its update, Eco-indicator 99 (Goedkoop
and Spriensma 1999), played pioneering roles in being fully damage-oriented meth-
ods, with Eco-indicator 99 becoming one of the references in the field. ReCiPe
(Goedkoop et al. 2009) then built on and replaced Eco-indicator 99 and the Dutch
handbook on LCA to combine midpoint and damage approaches.
    The EDIP97 method (Wenzel et al. 1997) is an approach that stops at midpoint
level, and was created to help industries develop environmentally friendly products.
Its update, EDIP2003 (Hauschild and Potting 2004), considers spatial differentiation
in the modeling of characterization factors.
    The ecological scarcity method (Braunschweig et al. 1998; Frischknecht and
Büsser Knöpfel 2013) compares the impacts of different emissions based on political
targets. It goes beyond environmental impacts to account for areas where environ-
mental pressure is high and therefore indicates the risks of increased environmental
costs for companies. Developed in Switzerland, alternative versions currently exist
for different countries such as the Netherlands, Colombia, and different regions of
Japan (Miyazaki et al. 2004).
    The U.S. EPA has developed the TRACI method (Bare et al. 2003; Bare et al.
2006), which assesses impacts at the midpoint level and is closely related to the risk
assessment methods of the U.S. EPA. It has been updated to include USEtox for the
toxicity-related categories.
    In Japan, LIME (Life cycle Impact assessment Method based on Endpoint model-
ing) quantifies Japanese environmental impacts (Itsubo and Inaba 2003), including
damage calculations that are coherent and original.
    Following the critical surface time method (CST95), IMPACT 2002+ (Jolliet
et al. 2003a,b) allowed impact assessment at both midpoint and damage levels. It
was innovative in the assessment of damage to HH and ecosystem quality by adapt-
ing the latest concepts of risk analysis to the specificities of LCA. This method has
now been replaced by the IMPACT World+ method, which provides factors for each
continent at midpoint and damage level.
Life Cycle Impact Assessment                                                          125


    Finally, the European impact assessment method (Hauschild et al. 2013) has opera-
tionalized several recommendations from the Life Cycle Initiative (Jolliet et al. 2004).
The recommendations in this guidance document are made based on an analysis of a
wide range of existing characterization models used in LCIA. In each impact category,
the first step of the analysis was a preselection of existing models. If a method was used
in multiple LCIA methodologies, only the most recent and up-to-date version of that
method was considered (Hauschild et al. 2010a,b). The second step was the develop-
ment of general recommendations for each category and drafting of assessment criteria
to be used in the evaluation and comparison of the preselected methods. Hauschild
et al. (2011) describe the selection criteria for each impact category. The final docu-
ment presents recommendations for each impact category, implementing the consensus
USEtox model (UNEP-SETAC toxicity model) presented by Hauschild et al. (2008) and
Rosenbaum et al. (2008). Though recommended for use by the Joint Research Centre
(the European Commission science agency), this method lacks somewhat in consistency
because indicators at midpoint level are not necessarily compatible across categories.
    We recommend always using two or three impact assessment methods in parallel,
choosing from among the latest methods in Table 5.4. The quality of the method used
is generally more important than its geographic relevance.
    In the following section, we summarize the key elements of the most widely used
methods (ecological scarcity, EPS, Eco-indicator 99, Dutch handbook on LCA) and
those that are the most up-to-date in different parts of the world (TRACI-US, LIME-
Japan, ReCiPe 2008, the European LCIA method, and IMPACT World+).

5.5 DESCRIPTION OF THE MAIN IMPACT ASSESSMENT METHODS
Sections 5.5.1 through 5.5.4 briefly describe methods that played an important role
in LCIA development and may still be used in certain studies, but which have since
been replaced by the more recent methods described in the subsequent Sections 5.5.5
through 5.5.12.

5.5.1    Critical Volumes: An Outdated Approach
The principle of this method (Bus 1984) is to calculate, for each pollutant to air or
water, the equivalent polluted volume based on a critical threshold. The equivalent
volumes determined for each pollutant are then grouped by medium (air, soil or
water). Sm is the critical volume (in units of cubic meters) of medium m (air, water,
or soil) (Equation 5.8):

                                               uim
                                        Sm =                                         (5.8)
                                               Cim

where:
  uim is the emission of substance i in grams
  Cim is the concentration threshold value of substance i in medium m in grams
       per cubic meter
126                                            Environmental Life Cycle Assessment


   The threshold values used for Cim generally come from the Swiss regulations
on air quality protection (LRV 1985) and waste water discharge (LRV 1975). For
example, the maximum allowable concentration of NOx is 0.03 mg/m3, which means
that 1 m3 of air is considered polluted for every 0.03 mg of NOx emitted. The results
are given in cubic meters of critical air, cubic meters of critical water, cubic meters
of solid waste, and megajoules of energy equivalent.
   Although this method has the advantage of simplicity, it is unsuitable on many
points. Comparing an emission to a threshold concentration value does not take into
account the persistence and fate of pollutants. The method does not allow comparison
between air pollutants and water pollutants and does not account for transfer into the
food chain. It assumes that a single pollutant is contained in a given volume, when in
reality many pollutants may be contained in the same volume. The volumes obtained
are, therefore, only used for comparison and have no connection with reality.
   This method therefore does not follow the structure defined by the Life Cycle
Initiative (Section 1.3) and should not be used as such or within other approaches
such as water footprints. Its approach of disregarding the fate of substances and their
degradation or dilution may substantially underestimate the effects of long-lived pol-
lutants (by around a factor of 1000, depending on the pollutant).

5.5.2 EPS 2000d Method
The EPS method (Environmental Priority Strategies in Product Design) was devel-
oped in Sweden (Ryding et al. 1993; Steen 1996), and updated by Steen a few years
later (1999). It aims to provide a monetary value for different types of damage by
using the “willingness to pay” concept described in Section 5.2.3. Impacts are
expressed in environmental load units (ELU) and can be aggregated into a single
indicator. This method, which includes the classification, characterization, and
weighting steps, played an important historical role by paving the way for the assess-
ment of damage.

5.5.3 Eco-indicator 99
Building on the original Eco-indicator 95 (Goedkoop 1995) method based on dis-
tances to target, the Eco-indicator 99 method (Goedkoop and Spriensma 1999) was
one of the first methods to consistently measure damage to resources, HH, and eco-
system quality. The methodology of Eco-indicator 99 was developed “top down,”
starting with damage (to HH, ecosystem quality, and mineral resources and fos-
sil fuels) to identify the most important impacts and then relate these to inventory
emissions.
    Human health damage is expressed in equivalent years of life lost (DALYs), and
includes respiratory and carcinogenic effects, global warming, destruction of ozone,
and ionizing radiation.
    Damage to ecosystem quality is expressed as a percentage of extinct species in a
certain area due to the environmental burden, which includes ecotoxicity and acidi-
fication and eutrophication, along with the impacts of land use and transformation
based on empirical data describing the presence of vascular plants.
Life Cycle Impact Assessment                                                        127


   Extraction of mineral and fossil resources is characterized by the excess energy
required for future extractions. A limiting assumption for this model is that all emis-
sions and land uses are assumed to occur in Europe.
   The scores in each category are then normalized by the total European score per
European, as determined by surveys. The results can be used as a default value but
should not be considered representative of the European average.
   Eco-indicator results can be presented for three different social perspectives, each
of which uses different time horizons, uncertainty management, and other subjective
factors. The individualist perspective considers only proven effects on short times-
cales, believing that technology can avoid many problems. The egalitarian perspec-
tive considers all possible effects on very long timescales, believing that problems
can lead to catastrophe. The hierarchist perspective is somewhere in between the
other two, balancing the short- and long-term perspectives.
   Eco-indicator 99 was an attractive method, especially its ability to compare and
combine mineral and fossil resources. But, some points were controversial, such
as only characterizing energy and fossil resources through the additional energy
required for their future extraction, without accounting for the direct use of energy.
Because of irreversible dissipation, the energy content of fossil resources also becomes
unavailable and should also be considered, as in, for example, IMPACT2002+.
   Although Eco-indicator 99 is still used, it is now de facto replaced by the ReCiPe
method described in Section 5.5.9.

5.5.4 Dutch Handbook on LCA
The CML 92 method (Heijungs 1992) was at one point one of the most used methods
in Europe. It was updated to CML 2002, giving rise to the handbook on LCA (Guinée
et al. 2001, 2002), a real cookbook of operational guidelines for performing LCA step
by step. This method stops at the midpoint level and is structured as follows.

5.5.4.1 Classification and Characterization
The emissions are classified in different impact categories, themselves divided into
three groups:

   • Group A includes the basic impact categories, namely abiotic resource
     depletion, impacts of land use (loss of soil resources), climate change,
     stratospheric ozone depletion, human toxicity, ecotoxicity (freshwater and
     marine aquatic ecotoxicity, terrestrial ecotoxicity), the formation of photo-
     oxidants, and acidification and eutrophication.
   • Group B includes more specific impact categories, namely, land-use impacts
     on biodiversity, sediment ecotoxicity (freshwater and marine), effects of
     ionizing radiation, unpleasant odors in air, noise, waste heat, and accidents.
   • Group C lists other impact categories, namely, the reduction of biotic
     resources, soil desiccation, and other unpleasant odors (e.g., smelly water).

  The characterization factors for human toxicity and ecotoxicity were developed by
Huijbregts (1999) using the USES-LCA 2.0 model. This model takes into account the
128                                                    Environmental Life Cycle Assessment


fate of substances in view of their persistence, biodegradation, and transfer between
different media (air, water, soil). Exposure is also considered through data such as
the volume of air breathed in, the volume of drinking water, and the consumption of
fish, meat, vegetables, and dairy produce.

5.5.4.2 Normalization and Evaluation
Scores for each impact category are then normalized by the total global score for this
effect to give the contribution of each category to the total global impact. The coef-
ficients of this method can be downloaded (see website details in Appendix I). Like
Eco-indicator 99, the CML 2002 method remains popular, but has been officially
replaced by the ReCiPe method described in Section 5.5.9.

5.5.5 Ecological Scarcity Method
As described by Frischknecht et al. (2008), the “ecological scarcity” method assesses
impacts of life cycle inventories based on the “distance-to-target” principle. If the cur-
rent emissions of a substance are close to or exceeding critical maximum acceptable
flow values, then that substance has a higher ecofactor and, thus, a higher impact score.
   Under this method, the total impact score S is calculated from the inventory of
substance emissions ui (in tons) as follows (Equation 5.9):

                                    S=   ∑ CF × u
                                          i
                                                   i      i                           (5.9)


where CFi is the ecofactor of substance i, expressed in ecopoint per unit of pollutant
emission or resource extraction (Equation 5.10):

                                                                   2
                                                    c ⎛ Fai ⎞
                            CFi = CFi midpoint ×      ×                              (5.10)
                                                   Fni ⎜⎝ Fci ⎟⎠

where:
  CFi midpoint 	is an optional characterization factor, such as a global warming poten-
                 tial of 23 for methane (in equivalent kilograms of CO2 per kilogram of
                 substance i)
  Fni,		used for normalization, is the annual flow of substance i in Switzerland
                 in tons per year
   Fci		is the critical maximum acceptable flow of substance i in the reference
                 area in tons per year, which is derived from science-based targets of
                 Swiss environmental policy
  Fai		is the actual flow of substance i in the reference area in tons per year
    c		is a constant, 1E12 (ecopoint per year)

   The method was first published in 1990, updated in 1998 (Brand et al. 1998) and
adjusted to the structure of the ISO standard in 2006 (Frischknecht et al. 2008), with
an enlarged set of substances, additional factors for freshwater use, and the use of the
Life Cycle Impact Assessment                                                                      129


long-term maintenance of soil fertility as the new target for heavy metal emissions
to air and to soil.
    A new 2013 version (Frischknecht and Büsser Knöpfel 2013) has been published
with a few adaptations. New ecofactors were determined for polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons (PAH) and radioactive isotopes emitted to air, as well as for oil to sea
and radioactive isotopes to surface water. For freshwater use, the regionalized eco-
factors introduced in the 2006 version have been expanded to all countries and con-
tinents to be applied to consumed water rather than water withdrawal. For resources,
new ecofactors were introduced for abiotic resources and land use in several biomes
based on the land-use impacts upon plant biodiversity. Finally, new ecofactors have
been introduced for noise of various means of transportation (i.e., truck, car, train,
aircraft), which are adaptable to individual noise levels. This method has the advan-
tage of presenting only one end result and, contrary to the critical volumes method,
it is internally consistent because it compares emissions to critical emission flows.
This method is useful to apply in conjunction with other methods or other midpoint
damage-oriented methods. It should, nevertheless, be noted that the critical flows
are difficult to determine for a large number of substances and that target values are
based not only on the potential damage, but also on what is achievable.

5.5.6 TRACI, the U.S. EPA Method
The U.S. EPA has developed TRACI (Tool for the Reduction and Assessment of
Chemical and other environmental Impacts) (Figure 5.10), which characterizes
potential effects, under U.S. conditions, for the following midpoint impact categories:
ozone depletion, global warming, acidification, eutrophication, tropospheric ozone

                            Impact categories
                            Ozone depletion                     Characterization (e.g., cancer)
                            Global warming
   Inventory of stressors   Acidification                           Air
    Land use                Cancer
                            Noncancer                    Soil              Water
    Chemical emissions
    Water use               Criteria
    Fossil fuel use         Eutrophication                                Sediment
                            Smog formation
                            Ecotoxicity
                            Fossil fuel use
                            Land use
                            Water use


                                                        .......
                                                    Ozone depletion
                                                  Global warming
                                                Cancer
     Tool for the reduction and
     assessment of chemical and
     other environmental impacts

                                                 Option A                   Option B



FIGURE 5.10 Structure of the TRACI impact assessment method. (From EPA, 2015, http://
www.epa.gov/nrmrl/std/traci/traci.html.)
130                                              Environmental Life Cycle Assessment


(smog) formation, ecotoxicity, human particulate effects, human carcinogenic effects,
human noncarcinogenic effects, and fossil fuel depletion. Location-specific methodolo-
gies within the United States were developed for the following impact categories: acidi-
fication, smog formation, eutrophication, carcinogenic effects, noncarcinogenic effects,
and criteria air pollutants. TRACI has adopted the USEtox characterization factors for
human carcinogenic and noncarcinogenic categories, as well as for ecotoxicity.
    TRACI impact categories were only characterized at the midpoint level. However,
normalization factors were published in a second stage (Bare et al. 2006; Laurent
et al. 2011a,b) to provide and communicate information on the relative significance
of the indicator results, and prepare for additional procedures, such as grouping,
weighting, or life cycle interpretation. The TRACI characterization factors are avail-
able in spreadsheet format, on request at http://www.epa.gov/nrmrl/std/sab/traci/.

5.5.7 IMPACT 2002+
IMPACT 2002+ (Jolliet et al. 2003a,b) is an impact assessment method providing results
both at midpoint and at the damage level. The inventory results are first grouped into 14
midpoint impact categories, with similar impact mechanisms or pathways. This method
introduced original developments in calculating human toxicity and ecotoxicity. For
several other categories, IMPACT 2002+ incorporated or adapted elements of the Eco-
indicator 99 method (Section 5.5.3) and the Dutch handbook on LCA (Section 5.5.4).
These midpoint categories are then assigned to four categories of damages, representing
the changes in environmental quality. IMPACT 2002+ considers the overall effects of
an emission or extraction integrated over a long-term or infinite time horizon.
    In IMPACT 2002+, the normalized damage factor is obtained by dividing the calcu-
lated impact by the total impact of all European emissions and extractions contributing
to the studied category, preferably at the damage level, but also available at the midpoint
level. The standard normalized score is therefore expressed in equivalent person-years
per functional unit. IMPACT 2002+ does not provide standardized weighting factors,
but the user can enter their own factors to weight the normalized scores. By assigning a
default weight of 1 to each category, the user considers that the total European impacts
on HH, ecosystem quality, climate change, and resources are all equivalent. More gen-
eral information about IMPACT 2002+ is given in Jolliet et al. (2003a,b). The general
structure of IMPACT 2002+ is to group midpoint impacts into four damage categories:
HH, ecosystem quality, climate change, and resources (Figure 5.15).

5.5.7.1 Human Health
Human toxicity (either carcinogenic or noncarcinogenic), ionizing radiation, deple-
tion of the ozone layer, respiratory effects of inorganic particulate matter, and pho-
tooxidant formation are the midpoint categories contributing to HH damage. The
effects of toxic substances on humans and ecosystems were modeled using IMPACT
2002, a multimedia and multipathway exposure model developed for western Europe
by Pennington et al. (2005). This model also allows for spatial differentiation of 135
European regions. For human toxicity, the HH damage is directly calculated at dam-
age level, then back-calculated in terms of the reference substance for this midpoint
category, namely vinyl chloride. The midpoint-to-damage characterization factors
Life Cycle Impact Assessment                                                          131


convert any midpoint HH impacts from kilograms of equivalent substance to HH
damage in units of effective years of life lost (DALYs). A normalization value of
0.0068 DALY/person-year is applied for HH, corresponding to a reduction in life
expectancy of 0.5 year per person over their lifetime. This value is calculated as the
sum of all impacts that contribute to HH, excluding those caused by climate change.

5.5.7.2 Ecosystem Quality
The midpoint categories aquatic ecotoxicity, terrestrial ecotoxicity, aquatic acidifica-
tion, terrestrial eutrophication and land use contribute to the loss of ecosystem quality.
Ecosystem damage is expressed in the potentially disappeared fraction of species (PDF)
over one square meter in one year. The damage score for ecosystem quality is divided
by a normalization value of 13,700 PDF-m2-year/person-year. This normalization value
was determined by combining all ecosystem impacts due to aquatic and terrestrial eco-
toxicology, eutrophication, aquatic and terrestrial acidification, and land use.

5.5.7.3 Climate Change
For the climate change category, the IPCC (2007) provides substance character-
ization factors for multiple time horizons, each accounting for the contribution to
warming integrated over a set time. Most LCA methods use a 100-year integration.
This does not account for the full impact caused by a CO2 emission, which takes
centuries to effectively decay (IPCC 2007). Thus, IMPACT 2002+ uses the longest
time horizon of 500 years when calculating characterization factors (Table 5.1). The
normalization value for climate change corresponds to the amount of greenhouse
gases emitted per person per year in Europe, namely 9950 kgCO2-eq/person/year.

5.5.7.4 Resources
The two midpoint categories contributing to the resources damage category are
the consumption of nonrenewable primary energy and the extraction of minerals.
Because energy resources are expressed in terms of nonrenewable primary energy
dissipated, the characterization factors include the surplus energy required to extract
future resources as well as the overall nonrenewable primary energy content of fos-
sil fuels (based on the calorific value of fossil fuels and on the ecoinvent value of
450 MJ/kg uranium for nuclear resources). Unlike nonrenewable primary energy,
minerals do not disappear, but are simply distributed into the economy and the envi-
ronment and can often be reused. Mineral use is thus aggregated with energy use
based on the additional mining energy consumed in the future due to lower ore
grades, expressed in additional megajoules per extracted unit. The normalization
value for resources is based on the annual consumption of nonrenewable primary
energy per person in western Europe, which is 152,000 MJ/person/year.
    The IMPACT 2002+ method has been replaced by IMPACT World+, as described
in Section 5.5.11. It still remains an often-used method today.


5.5.8 LIME: The Japanese Method
In response to the need for an LCIA method adapted to Japan, LIME (Figure 5.11) was
developed to quantify environmental impacts induced by environmental loading in
                                                                                                                                                                   132

                 Inventory                       Impact category                           Category end point              Safeguard subject        Integration

                   PM10                     Urban area air pollution                        Respiratory illness
               Formaldehyde                                                                Sick house syndrome
                                           Indoor air contamination                                                         Human society
                  Benzene                                                                   Cancer generation
                                                 Taxic chemicals
                   TCDD                                                                      Chronic illness                 Human health
                    Lead                                 Noise                                 Annoyance
                                                                                                                                    DALY
                   Noise                    Ozone layer destruction                           Sleep disorder
                  HCFCs                                                                         Cataracts                     Social assets
                                                 Global warming
                    CO2                                                                         Infection                             ¥
                                            Photochemical oxidants                            Thermal stress
                    SO2                                                                                                                             Single index
                    NOx                         Biological toxicity                          Disaster damage
                  Total N                            Acidification                            Plant growth
                                                                                                                               Ecosystem              Ecoindex
                  Total P                                                                     Farm products                                              ¥
                                                 Eutrophication
                  NMVOC                                                                            Land                       Biodiversity
                   Waste                                Waste                                Marine products
                                                                                                                                    EINES
                    Land                               Land use                                   Energy
                                                                                                                               Primary
                  Copper                        Mineral resources                               User cost                     production
                    Oil                          consumption                                  Phytoplankton                         NPP
                 Natural gas                Fossil fuel consumption                         Terrestrial species                Damage                Integration
                   Wood                          Forest resources                                                             assessment
                                                                                             Marine species
                                                  consumption
                                                      Characterization

                   Fate analysis/exposure analysis                       Impact analysis                          Damage analysis             Weighting


FIGURE 5.11 General structure of the LIME2 method. (From Itsubo, N. and Inaba, A. LIME2 Life-cycle Impact assessment Method on Endpoint
                                                                                                                                                                   Environmental Life Cycle Assessment




modeling, Summary, JLCA newsletter, March 2012, Life-Cycle Assessment Society of Japan. http://lca-forum.org/english/pdf/No12_Summary.pdf).
Life Cycle Impact Assessment                                                       133


Japan (Itsubo and Inaba 2003). With a strong emphasis and originality on a consistent
assessment of environmental impacts at the damage level, LIME specifically aimed
at developing characterization factors and damage factors that reflect Japan’s environ-
mental conditions, along with weighting factors that reflect Japan’s social values.
    Figure 5.11 illustrates the conceptual structure of LIME, which is similar to
the IMPACT 2002+ method discussed in the previous subsection, aggregating
an inventory of emissions and resource use into various levels of impact. One
important LIME midpoint impact category is urban air pollution, which can bet-
ter account for urban conditions. The 11 LIME midpoint impact categories are
further aggregated into the following four areas of protection: HH, social wel-
fare, biodiversity, and plant production, respectively, expressed in terms of DALYs,
Japanese yen, EINES (expected increase in number of extinct species), and NPP
(net primary production).
    The final weighting steps integrate the four damage categories into a single index
using conjoint analysis, a technique mostly applied in market research and envi-
ronmental economics. Two types of weighting factors were obtained by using this
method: willingness to pay and dimensionless indicators.

5.5.9 ReCiPe 2008
ReCiPe 2008 (Goedkoop et al. 2009) arose from the desire to merge the midpoint
approach of the CML method (Guinée et al. 2002; Section 5.5.4) with the dam-
age approach of the Eco-indicator 99 method (Goedkoop and Spriensma 1999;
Section 5.5.3). Collaboration with RIVM (Dutch National Institute of Public
Health) and the University of Nijmegen ensured access to knowledge and models
over a wide range of environmental issues, ranging from acidification to climate
change. This synthesis work resulted in the ReCiPe LCIA method, with impact
category indicators and characterization factors at the midpoint and damage levels
(Table 5.5 and Figure 5.12).
   The model structure depicted in Figure 5.12 is similar to methods presented
previously in linking the life cycle inventory (left) to a midpoint indicator (middle)
and damage indicator (right). An added feature of the ReCiPe method is that results
are presented for three different social perspectives, based on subjective value
choices, such as time horizon and uncertainty management (see Section 5.5.3 for
a description of these perspectives taken from the Eco-indicator approach).
   Eighteen impact categories are addressed at the midpoint level, leading to 18
characterization factors (Table 5.5). A general criterion used to define these impact
categories and indicators is that midpoint impact categories should have a stand-
alone value in a midpoint-oriented LCIA method, but that they should also be usable
as an intermediate step in a damage-oriented method.
   The last three columns of Table 5.5 link each midpoint category to relevant dam-
age categories. ReCiPe uses the following three damage categories: damage to HH
expressed in DALYs, damage to ecosystem diversity (ED) expressed in loss of spe-
cies per year, and damage to resource availability (RA) expressed in U.S. dollars.
ReCiPe 2008 characterization factors have been tabulated in a Microsoft Excel
spreadsheet available at www.lcia-recipe.info.
134                                                     Environmental Life Cycle Assessment



 TABLE 5.5
 ReCiPe Midpoint Categories, including Assignment to Damage (End Point)
 Midpoint Impact                                                                    Damage Impact
 Category                                                                             Categorya
 Name                      Abbreviation                    Unit                  HH        ED       RA
 Climate change               GWP                     kg (CO2 to air)             +         +
 Ozone depletion              ODP                   kg (CFC-11 to air)            +         –
 Terrestrial                  TAP                     kg (SO2 to air)                       +
  acidification
 Freshwater                     FEP                kg (P to freshwater)                      +
  eutrophication
 Marine                        MEP                 kg (N to freshwater)                     −
  eutrophication
 Human toxicity                HTP               kg (14DCB to urban air)           +
 Photochemical                 POFP                kg (NMVOC to air)               +        −
  oxidant formation
 Particulate matter            PMFP                  kg (PM10 to air)              +
  formation
 Terrestrial ecotoxicity       TETP           kg (14DCB to industrial soil)                 +
 Freshwater                    FETP            kg (14DCB to freshwater)                     +
  ecotoxicity
 Marine ecotoxicity            METP            kg (14DCB to marine water)                   +
 Ionizing radiation             IRP                  kg (U235 to air)              +
 Agricultural land             ALOP             m -year (agricultural land)
                                                  2
                                                                                            +        −
  occupation
 Urban land                    ULOP                m2-year (urban land)                     +        −
  occupation
 Natural land                  NLTP                  m2 (natural land)                      +        −
  transformation
 Water depletion               WDP                      m3 (water)                                   −
 Mineral resource              MDP                       kg (Fe)                                     +
  depletion
 Fossil resource                FDP                       kg (oil)                                   +
  depletion

 Source: Goedkoop, M., et al., ReCiPe 2008. A Life Cycle Impact Assessment Method Which
           Comprises Harmonised Category Indicators at the Midpoint and the Endpoint Level. The
           Hague, the Netherlands: VROM, 2009. http://www.pre-sustainability.com/download/misc/
           ReCiPe_main_report_final_27-02-2009_web.pdf
 a HH refers to human health, ED to ecosystem diversity, and RA to resource availability; “+” means

   that a quantitative connection has been established for this link in ReCiPe 2008; “−” means that
   although this is an important link, no quantitative connection could be established. In the abbrevia-
   tions, P is for “potential”.
Life Cycle Impact Assessment                                                                 135


                     Ozone depletion          Decr. ozone p.          Damage
                          Hum tox            Hazard. w. dose          Damage




                                                                                    Human health
    LCI
                         Radiation           Absorbed dose            Damage




                                                                                      (DALY)
   result
                      P.C. ozone form.         Ozone conc.
                                                                      Damage
   Raw mat.           Particulate form.         PM10 conc.
   Land use
       CO2             Climate change        Infra-red forcing        Damage
      VOS               Terr. ecotox         Hazard w. conc.
          P
       SO2               Terr. acidif.       Base saturation




                                                                                    (species-year)
                                                                      Terrestial




                                                                                     Ecosystems
       NOx
                        Agr. land occ.       Occupied area             damage
       CFC
        Cd            Urban land occ.        Occupied area
      PAH
      DDT             Nat. land transf.     Transformed area

                       Marine ecotox.        Hazard w. conc.          Marine w.
                                                                       damage
                       Marine eutr.           Algae growth




                                                                                    Resources cost
                                              Algae growth




                                                                                    increase in ($)
                      Fresh water eutr.                               Fresh w.
                                             Hazard w. conc           damage
                      Fresh w. ecotox.
                      Fossil fuel cons.      Energy content
                                                                      Damage
                       Minerals cons.        Decrease conc.
                         Water cons.            Water use




                                                                                          End point
                    Environmental           Midpoint impact       Environmental
                   mechanism part 1            category          mechanism part 2




FIGURE 5.12 General structure of the ReCiPe 2008 method. (From Goedkoop, M., et al.,
ReCiPe 2008. A Life Cycle Impact Assessment Method Which Comprises Harmonised
Category Indicators at the Midpoint and the Endpoint Level. The Hague, the Netherlands:
VROM, 2009. http://www.pre-sustainability.com/download/misc/ReCiPe_main_report_
final_27-02-2009_web.pdf. With permission.)




5.5.10 New European Method
Developed under the auspices of the International Reference Life Cycle Data System
(ILCD), the ILCD LCIA method focuses on the following points (Hauschild et al.
2010a,b; 2011, 2013; see Table 5.6):

   1. Analysis of existing LCIA methodologies and related approaches
   2. Definition of evaluation criteria for recommended LCIA methods and gen-
      eral recommendations for characterization models and areas of protection
   3. Guidance on recommended LCIA characterization framework, models,
      and factors
   4. Documentation of recommended characterization factors in the ILCD data
      system
136                                                        Environmental Life Cycle Assessment



TABLE 5.6
Summary of Recommended Methods and Their Quality Classification for
Each Midpoint Impact Category and Calculation from Midpoint to Endpoint
                       Recommendation at Midpoint                    From Midpoint to Damage
Impact             Recommended default        Classification a   Recommended             Classification
 category           LCIA method and                               default LCIA
                    indicator                                     method and
                                                                  Indicator
Climate change     IPCC radiative forcing            I           De Schryver et al.           III
                    expressed as global                           (2009): Link to
                    warming potential                             DALY (HH) and
                    100 years (GWP100)                            PDF-m3-year (ED)
Ozone              1999 WMO Ozone                    I           ReCiPe model for             III
 depletion          Depletion Potential                           human damage, in
                    (ODP)                                         DALY
Human              USEtox comparative             II/III         DALY calculation            II/III
 toxicity,          toxic unit for humans                         adapted from
 cancer effects     (CTUh)                                        Huijbregts et al.
                                                                  (2005)
Human              USEtox comparative             II/III         DALY calculation             III
 toxicity,          toxic unit for humans                         adapted from
 noncancer          (CTUh)                                        Huijbregts et al.
 effects                                                          (2005)
Particulate        Humbert et al. (2011):          I/II          DALY calculation             I/II
 matter/            Intake fraction for                           adapted from van
 respiratory        fine particles                                Zelm et al. (2008)
 inorganics         (kgPM2.5-eq/kg)
Ionizing           Frischknecht et al.              II           DALY                         III
 radiation,         (2005): Human
 human health       exposure efficiency
                    relative to U235
Ionizing           AMI comparative toxic            III          None identified,              −
 radiation,         unit for humans                               possible to use
 ecosystems         (CTUh)                                        PDF-m3-year
Photochemical      ReCiPe tropospheric              II           DALY calculation              II
 ozone              ozone concentration                           from van Zelm et al.
 formation          increase (POCP)                               (2008)
Acidification      (Seppälä et al. 2006,            II           PDF                          III
 and terrestrial    Posch et al. 2008):
 eutrophication     Accumulated
                    exceedance (AE)
Eutrophication,    Struijs et al. (2008):           II           Damage to                    III
 aquatic            Residence time of                             freshwater
                    nutrients in freshwater                       ecosystems:
                    (P) or marine end                             PDF-m3-year
                    compartment (N)
Life Cycle Impact Assessment                                                                          137



TABLE 5.6 (Continued)
Summary of Recommended Methods and Their Quality Classification for
Each Midpoint Impact Category and Calculation from Midpoint to Endpoint
                        Recommendation at Midpoint                   From Midpoint to Damage
Ecotoxicity        USEtox comparative              II/III        None identified,                −
                    toxic unit for                                possible to use
                    ecosystems (CTUe)                             PDF-m3-year
Land use           Milà i Canals et al.              III                                        III
                    (2007): Soil organic
                    matter
Resource           Frischknecht et al.               II          None identified                 −
 depletion,         (2008): Water use
 water              related to local water
                    scarcity
Resource           CML 2002 scarcity                 II          ReCiPe surplus costs           III
 depletion,
 mineral, fossil
 and renewable

Source: Hauschild, M., et al., International Journal of Life Cycle Assessment, 18, 683–697, 2013. http://
         dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11367-012-0489-5.
Note: Depletion of renewable resources is included in the analysis but none of the analyzed methods is
        mature for recommendation.
a I: Recommended and satisfactory; II: Recommended, some improvements needed; III: denoted as

  interim, that is, the most appropriate among the existing approaches but not yet ready for
  recommendation.



    The ILCD method provides global recommendations and characterization fac-
tors for the modeling of the most common impact categories, linking emissions and
resources consumed over the life cycle to the indicators at midpoint and end point level.
    The recommendations and factors are mostly based on existing LCIA models
and characterization methods, supplemented by a selection of environmental mod-
els. Recommendations are given for climate change, ozone depletion, human toxic-
ity (including ionizing radiation impacts), particulate matter/respiratory inorganics,
photochemical ozone formation, acidification, eutrophication, ecotoxicity (includ-
ing ionizing radiation impacts), land use, resource depletion, and a number of other
impacts (i.e., noise, accidents, erosion, desiccation, and salinization). The overall
framework assesses these impacts relative to the three areas of protection: HH, natu-
ral environment, and natural resources. The recommended methods and associated
characterization factors are each classified by quality:

   Class I: Recommended and satisfactory
   Class II: Recommended, some improvements needed
   Class III: Denoted as interim; that is, the most appropriate among the existing
      approaches but not yet ready for recommendation
138                                           Environmental Life Cycle Assessment


   Though developed in Europe, the ILCD LCIA method aims to be globally appli-
cable due to the global nature of goods and services, crossing national and geographic
borders over a life cycle. The ILCD recommendations and their classification are sum-
marized in Table 5.6 for midpoint categories and for the link from midpoint to damage.

5.5.11 IMPACT World+
IMPACT World+ was developed in response to the need for a regionalized
impact assessment method covering the entire world, and implementing state-of-
the-art characterization modeling approaches. Developed as a joint major update
to IMPACT 2002+, EDIP, and LUCAS (a Canadian-specific impact assessment
method; Toffoletto et al. 2007), it includes uncertainty information to account for
both spatial variability and model uncertainty. It regionally assesses the impacts of
any georeferenced emission/resource use, providing continent-specific characteriza-
tion factors. It also calculates the uncertainty associated with an unknown emission
location based on the geographical variability of characterization factors at a given
geographical scale.
   We wish to highlight three key features of IMPACT World+:

   1. IMPACT World+ has multiple novel ways of characterizing midpoint
      level impacts. It is the first LCIA method to include the consensus-based
      USEtox model for toxicity (Hauschild et al. 2008; Rosenbaum et al. 2008)
      and water-use impacts (Boulay et al. 2011a,b) consistently in a damage-
      oriented method. It also includes major modeling improvements, such as
      the inclusion of ecosystem services in land use (Saad et al. 2013), the inclu-
      sion of acidification in an improved atmospheric fate model (Roy et al. 2012
      a,b), improved water and mineral resource use with the introduction of an
      extraction–consumption–competition–adaptation approach, more accu-
      rate respiratory effects based on new epidemiologically derived factors
      (Humbert et al. 2011; Gronlund et al. 2015), and spatialized eutrophication
      with a 0.5° × 0.5° grid covering the world (Helmes et al. 2012). IMPACT
      World+ also divides some midpoint indicators into subcategories, with mul-
      tiple distinct pathways for affecting human toxicity and ecotoxicity. It also
      specifically accounts for indoor emissions (Wenger et al. 2012) and pesti-
      cide residues (Fantke et al. 2011, 2012). Thirty midpoint indicators are thus
      accounted for in the IMPACT World+ method.
   2. The damage calculation is similar to that presented in other methods, where
      each midpoint impact can cause damage to up to three areas of protec-
      tion: HH, ecosystem quality, and ecosystem services and resources (which
      includes societal impacts with no direct health consequences, along with
      depreciation of ecosystem services). This allows the midpoint contributions
      to be put into perspective. Table 5.7 summarizes the midpoint-to-damage
      factors for the main midpoint categories.
   3. IMPACT World+ allows users to optionally group certain midpoint cat-
      egories associated with either climate change or water use, while avoiding
      double counting with other impact categories.
Life Cycle Impact Assessment                                                                          139



TABLE 5.7
Main IMPACT World+ Midpoint Categories and Midpoint-to-Damage
Factors Relating Each to Damage to Human Health (HH), Ecosystem Quality
(EQ), and Ecosystem Services and Resources (ER)
Midpoint Impact                Damage
Categories                    Categories                   HH                       EQ               ER
Name                              Unit                    DALY                  PDF-m -year
                                                                                      2        a     $
Global warming                  kgCO2-eq        8.3 × 10–7 + 2.0 × 10–6 LTb    0.185 + 0.43 LT
Marine acidification             kgCO2                                        0.0165 + 0.152 LT
Land occupation,            ha-year arable eq                                       6000
 biodiversity
Fossil energy use             MJ deprived                                                           0.005c
Mineral resources use         kg deprived                                                          Interim
Water use                     m3 deprived               1.8 × 10–4                 0.0020          Interim
Terrestrial acidification       kgSO2-eq                                            8.32
Aquatic eutrophication      kg PO4 P-lim eq                                         55.3
Marine eutrophication        kg N N-lim eq                                          12.5
Aquatic ecotoxicity              CTUe*                                                1
 (USEtox)
Toxicity cancer                  CTUh                      11.5
 (USEtox)
Toxicity noncancer               CTUh                      2.7
 (USEtox)
Ionizing radiations             BqC-14 eq              2.1 × 10–10               1.9 × 10–10
Respiratory inorganics          kgPM2.5-eq              0.00083
 (PM)
Respiratory organics           kgNMVOC-eq               3.9 × 10–8
Ozone layer depletion          kgCFC-11 eq               0.00176                      -

Note: For example, global warming causes 8.3 × 10–7 DALY (disability-adjusted life years) per kilogram
       of CO2 equivalent emitted.
a Potentially disappeared fraction of species over 1 m2 in 1 year.

b LT stands for long-term impacts beyond 100 years, so the top number represents impact for the first

  100 years.
c This midpoint to end point damage factor is substance specific.

*CTU refers to USEtox comparative toxic units, corresponding to potentially affected fraction of species-
cubic meter-days per kilogram for ecosystem impacts (CTUe) and to cases of cancer and noncancer for HH
impacts (CTUh).




   The front-end panel case study described in Section 5.3 illustrates the use of
IMPACTWorld+.
   Normalization is performed at the global level, as described theoretically in
Section 5.2.3. IMPACT World+ uses the total global scores of 0.022 DALY/person-
year for HH damage, 8,500 PDF-m2-year/person-year for ecosystem quality damage,
140                                          Environmental Life Cycle Assessment


and 63,100 MJ/person-year or $313/person-year in resources or ecosystem services,
assuming a future increase in energy price due to resource scarcity of $0.005/MJ.
   IMPACT World+ does not provide standardized weights, leaving the user with
the opportunity to select their own factors. It can be coupled with the weighting
factors of the stepwise method derived from budget constraints (Weidema 2009),
which attributes the following weights: €74,000/DALY for HH, €0.14/PDF-m2-year
for ecosystem quality and €1/€ for resources.
   All publications supporting the creation of IMPACT World+ are provided at www.
impactworldplus.org, together with midpoint and damage characterization factors.


5.5.12 USEtox
Developed by a team of researchers from the Task Force on Toxic Impacts under
the UNEP-SETAC Life Cycle Initiative, USEtox estimates the fate, exposure, and
effects of chemicals. The UNEP-SETAC initiative supports the development, evalu-
ation, application, and dissemination of USEtox to improve understanding and man-
agement of chemicals in the global environment.
   The USEtox model is not a comprehensive LCIA method but an environmental
model focusing on the characterization of human and ecotoxicological impacts of
LCIA and comparative risk assessment (CRA). It is presently used to calculate mid-
point damage in the European ILCD method, and it has been fully integrated in the
midpoint–end point IMPACT World+ method.
   Prior to USEtox, a number of different models around the world had been devel-
oped to estimate human and ecotoxicological impacts, varying in scope, modeling
principles applied, and substances covered. The situation for the LCA practitioner
who wished to include chemical-related impacts was that (a) there would probably be
many substances in the life cycle inventory for which no characterization factor was
available from any of the models, and (b) published characterization factors would
often vary substantially among the models.
   This unsatisfactory situation led the UNEP-SETAC Life Cycle Initiative to launch
a comparison and harmonization of existing characterization models to (Hauschild
et al. 2008):

   1. Identify which differences in the old characterization models caused the
      observed differences in their characterization factors
   2. Develop a scientific consensus about good modeling practice, based on the
      identified influential differences
   3. Harmonize the old characterization models, removing unintended
      differences
   4. Develop a scientific consensus model based on the learnings from the com-
      parison of the characterization models with the following characteristics
   5. Be parsimonious (as simple as possible, as complex as needed), containing
      only the model elements which were identified as the most influential in the
      comparison of the existing characterization models
   6. Be transparent and well documented
Life Cycle Impact Assessment                                                           141


   7. Fall within the range of the existing characterization models; that is, not
      differ more from the old characterization models than these differ among
      themselves
   8. Be endorsed by the modelers behind all participating models

   The result of this scientific consensus model development is the USEtox model
(Rosenbaum et al. 2008) implemented in Microsoft Excel. The USEtox model cal-
culates characterization factors for aquatic ecotoxicity (Henderson et al. 2011) and
for human toxicity (Rosenbaum et al. 2011), focusing on carcinogenic impacts and
noncarcinogenic impacts for chemical emissions to urban air, rural air, freshwater,
sea water, agricultural soil, and natural soil (Figure 5.13). The unit of the character-
ization factor for freshwater aquatic ecotoxicity is the potentially affected fraction
of species-3-days per kilogram of emissions and for human toxicity is cases per
kilogram of emissions, where both are expressed as comparative toxic units (CTU)
to stress the comparative nature of the characterization factors.
   The fate component is the same for ecotoxicity and human toxicity, and then com-
bined with a human exposure model to describe the transport from environmental
compartments to humans via inhalation and ingestion.
   In addition to the fate factors and exposure factors, effect factors are required
to calculate human-toxicological characterization factors. The effect factor is the
change in lifetime disease probability due to change in lifetime intake of a pollutant
(cases/kg). USEtox determines effect factors for carcinogenic and noncarcinogenic
chemicals separately. Data for effects after inhalation and oral exposure are also

                                       Emissions

    Fate
  factor                                    Chemical fate
                                                                             Intake
                                                       Air
                                          Soil                               fraction (iF)
                        Water
                        Time-integrated concentration
                                                   Human exposure
                 Concentration
                   response

                       Species
                                                   Dose taken in
 Ecotox            exposure – intake
                                                             Dose response
   effect
  factor
                                                                             Human
                  Potentially affected                                       effect
                  fraction of species                                        factor
                                                      Disease
                                                    incidences
                                                          Severity
                      Damage to                     Damage to
                  aquatic ecosystems               human health


FIGURE 5.13 Main steps of the USEtox assessment.
142                                            Environmental Life Cycle Assessment


determined separately. The software, user manual, and results for more than 1000
substances for human toxicity and 2500 substances for aquatic ecotoxicity are avail-
able at http://www.usetox.org/. Though not an LCIA method on its own, USEtox is
likely to become the default model to screen the toxicity of chemicals in LCIA, with
more detailed models applied for complementary advanced and spatialized studies.

5.6 FUTURE DEVELOPMENTS
Since the early critical volumes method, considerable advances have been made
in fate modeling and exposure of substances for human toxicity and ecotoxicity
(IMPACT World+, ReCiPe), and the first consensus methods are becoming avail-
able (USEtox). There are still many impact assessment features that are currently in
development or that will be needed in the future.

5.6.1 Further Spatial Differentiation
The fate, exposure, and toxicity of substances depend on multiple spatial aspects.
The population exposure to a substance will, of course, be greater in a densely popu-
lated area. Also, an emission to water will have very different impacts if it is into a
narrow river, upstream of a large lake (high dilution volume, high residence time of
water), or into a river that quickly empties into an ocean.
   By comparing two models that treated Europe either as one single region or as 130
subregions, Pennington et al. (2005) showed that for the purposes of LCA, a descrip-
tion of the one-box European average is generally satisfactory as a first approach.
The cases of emissions near a lake or into a river leading directly to the ocean are the
exceptions and should be differentiated in the future.
   More generally, LCA developers are continuing to identify a limited number of
key characteristics that can cause significant variation in impacts, such as emissions
at ground level versus at the height of a chimney, and emissions in areas with high
versus low population densities.

5.6.2    Methods for Higher Resolution Life Cycle Impact Assessment
Impacts can differ greatly depending on the characteristics of the emission region,
yet products are having increasingly global supply chains, with emissions spanning
the world. IMPACT World+ has therefore made an important step forward toward
providing country- and region-specific characterization factors. Further develop-
ments pursue this effort further to provide more detailed spatialization for toxicity.
   The LCImpact European project has, for example, provided advanced character-
ization in several impact category domains; for example, comparing subcontinental
versions of USEtox with the multiregional IMPACT World+ model that accounts for
transboundary air advection (Kounina et al. 2014; Shaked 2011). Different scenarios
can be run in a model such as IMPACTWorld to provide guidance to decision-makers
on the optimal methods for decreasing HH impacts and increasing sustainability in
global trade. Such a consumer-oriented analysis provides a unique viewpoint in com-
parison with other assessments that are typically centered around production. Such
Life Cycle Impact Assessment                                                      143


a model can also track the fate and exposure of chemicals traveling through food
exports, which preliminary studies have shown can be as important as air transport.
The LCImpact project will generate a full impact assessment method, incorporating
such developments along with other innovations.
   At the interface between risk assessment and LCIA, the Pangea multiscale model
(Wannaz et al. 2015) enables spatial coverage from a 10 km scale up to a global scale,
with high resolution in user-defined regions of special interest.


5.6.3 Substances and Impact Categories
Existing methods only study up to 1000 substances, so UNEP-SETAC is continuing
to study the almost 100,000 substances listed in EINECS (European Inventory of
Existing Commercial Substances) and the more than 65 million of substances regis-
tered in the Chemical Abstracts Service (CAS) system.
   Moreover, certain impact categories need to be further developed and refined,
with the following new developments to be prioritized:

   • Worker exposure is often neglected in LCA but may play a dominant role.
   • Near-field consumer exposure may be significant, especially during the use
     stage, to products such as cosmetics, detergents, and chemicals embedded
     in furniture or food packaging. USEtox-compatible approaches are pres-
     ently being developed to provide product-specific exposure models.
   • Effects of land use and land transformation are being included.
   • Resource consumption, competition, adaptation, and substitution after dis-
     posal or use are being further developed, rather than simply considering
     their extraction from the environment.

   Further development of water impacts are needed at midpoint and damage levels.
For water resources, as a baseline evaluation, the water stress index (WSI) developed
by Pfister et al. (2009) can be used to evaluate potential impacts on HH related to
water use. The WSI combines the water consumed (also called blue water, in units of
cubic meters), with the regional water availability to provide an evaluation of water
in competition. Impacts from pollutants emitted into water are already accounted
for in the ecotoxicology impact categories and should not be double counted. In the
frame of the UNEP-SETAC Life Cycle Initiative, further work is presently carried
out within the Water Use in LCA (WULCA) task force to extend this scarcity index
to account for both human and ecosystem water needs.


5.6.4 Harmonization of Life Cycle Impact Assessment: The Life Cycle
       Initiative Flagship Project for LCIA Global Guidance
Initiated in 2012, the LCIA guidance flagship project of the UNEP/SETAC Life
Cycle Initiative is providing global guidance and building consensus on environmen-
tal LCIA indicators.
144                                              Environmental Life Cycle Assessment


    As described by Jolliet et al. (2014), the project focuses in the first stage on highly
relevant impact categories, such as global warming, health effects of particulate mat-
ter emissions, land use, and water use. Consensus on these can be reached by focus-
ing first on selected pathways for which there is common agreement; for example, for
biodiversity impacts due to land occupation. Earlier LCIA work carried out within
the UNEP-SETAC Life Cycle Initiative, such as USEtox and WULCA, is being
used as a starting point for further improvement. In the second stage, the project
will address human toxicity, acidification, eutrophication, ecotoxicity, and energy
resources. It will also provide recommendations on how to integrate these individual
indicators in a consistent framework, ensuring consistency of the indicator selection
process and assessment across impact categories. The focus is to reach consensus
on midpoint indicators first, while positioning and relating these indicators within a
consistent midpoint–end point framework.

EXERCISES
Exercise 5.1: Impact Calculation of Global Warming Impacts
Using the 100-year global warming potentials in Table 5.1, calculate the total impact
in the global warming category due to the following emissions associated with 1 kg
of the following textile materials: wool, cotton, and nylon (Tables 5.8 through 5.10).

   1. What are the relative contributions of CH4 and N2O to the total global
      warming score of these textile materials?


        TABLE 5.8
        Calculation of Global Warming Impact of Greenhouse Gas
        Emissions Associated with 1 kg Wool at Farm
        Emissions      Unit        GWP         Unit        Equivalent       Unit
        61            kgCO2/FU              kgCO2/kgCO2                  kgCO2-eq/FU
        0.058         kgN20/FU              kgN20/kgCO2                  kgCO2-eq/FU
        1.4           kgCH4/FU              kgCH4/kgCO2                  kgCO2-eq/FU
                                              Total:                     kgCO2-eq/FU




       TABLE 5.9
       Calculation of Global Warming Impact of Greenhouse Gas
       Emissions Associated with 1 kg Cotton at Farm
       Emissions        Unit       GWP           Unit       Equivalent       Unit
       1.2            kgCO2/FU               kgCO2/kgCO2                  kgCO2-eq/FU
       0.0036         kgN20/FU               kgN20/kgCO2                  kgCO2-eq/FU
       0.0022         kgCH4/FU               kgCH4/kgCO2                  kgCO2-eq/FU
                                                Total:                    kgCO2-eq/FU
Life Cycle Impact Assessment                                                                            145



        TABLE 5.10
        Calculation of Global Warming Impact of Greenhouse Gas
        Emissions Associated with 1 kg Nylon at Farm
        Emissions               Unit             GWP          Unit         Equivalent      Unit
        6.5                   kgCO2/FU                     kgCO2/kgCO2                  kgCO2-eq/FU
        0.00074               kgN20/FU                     kgN20/kgCO2                  kgCO2-eq/FU
        0.049                 kgCH4/FU                     kgCH4/kgCO2                  kgCO2-eq/FU
                                                             Total:                     kgCO2-eq/FU




TABLE 5.11
Inventory of the Hand-Dryer and Paper Towel Scenarios
                       CO2                    CH4        N2 O    PM10     PM2.5     NOx             SOx
          Functional (kgCO2/                (kgCH4/    (kgN20/ (kgPM10/ (kgPM2.5/ (kgNOx/         (kgSOx/
Scenarios   Unit       unit)                  unit)      unit)   unit)    unit)     unit)           unit)
Air-dryer 1 pair of          1.1 × 10–2 2.3 × 10–5 7.2 × 10–8 1.5× 10–6 3.6× 10–10 1.4× 10–5 4.80× 10–5
Paper      hands             1.0 × 10–3 1.8 × 10–7 4.1 × 10–7 2.4 × 10–8 4.2 × 10–6 3.1 × 10–5 3.7 × 10–7
 towels    dried




TABLE 5.12
Characterization Factors, Midpoint CFi
              Comparable   CO2     CH4     N2O     PM10     PM2.5     NOx     SOx
                 Unit    (kgCO2) (kgCH4) (kgN20) (kgPM10) (kgPM2.5) (kgNOx) (kgSOx)
GWP               kgCO2-eq             1         25       298         0          0          0           0
Respiratory       kgPM2.5              0          0        0         0.6         1       0.0077       0.038
 inorganics




TABLE 5.13
Midpoint to Damage; Normalization, and Weighting Factors
                       Midpoint-to-Damage Factor              Normalization Factor      Weighting Factor
                                           MDF                           Nk                    wk
Respiratory                      (DALY/kgPM2.5)                 (DALY/person-year)         (€/DALY)
 inorganics
                                       0.00083                        0.0216                 74,000
Global warming                    (DALY/kgCO2)                  (DALY/person-year)         (€/DALY)
                                   8.30 × 10–7                       0.0216                  74,000
                                                                                                                                                              146




TABLE 5.14
Impact Assessment (form)
                        Air-Dryer – Respiratory Inorganics                                           Paper Towels – Respiratory Inorganics
                                               Midpoint                                                                       Midpoint         Midpoint
                          Emission Per      Characterization      Midpoint                                  Emission       Characterization    Score Per
                              FU                Factor          Score per FU                                 Per FU            Factor             FU
Respiratory                                                      (kgPM2.5-eq/       Respiratory                                                (kgPM2.5-eq/
Inorganics                   (kg/FU)          (kgPM2.5-eq/kg)       FU)             Inorganics               (kg/FU)         (kgPM2.5-eq/kg)      FU)
Substance 1: PM10                                                               Substance 1: PM10
Substance 2: PM2.5                                                              Substance 2: PM2.5
Substance 3: NOx                                                                Substance 3: NOx
Substance 4: SOx                                                                Substance #4: SOx
Total midpoint impact                                                           Total midpoint impact
(kgeqPM2.5/FU):                                                                 (kgeqPM2.5/FU):
Total damage                                                                    Total damage
(DALY/FU):                                                                      (DALY/FU):
Normalized damage                                                               Normalized damage
(pt/FU):                                                                        (pt/FU):
Weighted damage                                                                 Weighted damage
(€/FU)                                                                          (€/FU)
                                                                                                                                                              Environmental Life Cycle Assessment
                         Air-Dryer – Climate Change                                                  Paper Towels – Climate Change
                                            Midpoint                                                                     Midpoint         Midpoint
                         Emission Per    Characterization     Midpoint                                   Emission     Characterization    Score per
                             FU              Factor         Score Per FU                                  Per FU          Factor             FU
Climate change             (kg/FU)         (kgCO2-eq/kg)    (kgCO2-eq/FU)     Climate change             (kg/FU)         (kgCO2-eq/kg)   (kgCO2-eq/FU)
Substance 1: CO2                                                            Substance 1: CO2
Substance 2: CH4                                                            Substance 2: CH4
Substance 3: N2O                                                            Substance 3: N2O
Total midpoint damage                                                       Total midpoint damage
                                                                                                                                                         Life Cycle Impact Assessment




(kgCO2-eq/FU):                                                              (kgCO2-eq/FU):
Total end point damage                                                      Total end point damage
(DALY/FU):                                                                  (DALY/FU):
Normalized damage                                                           Normalized damage
(pt/FU):                                                                    (pt/FU):
Weighted damage                                                             Weighted damage
(€/FU)                                                                      (€/FU)
                                                                                                                                                         147
148                                           Environmental Life Cycle Assessment


   2. Rank the materials according to their global warming scores per kilogram.
   3. Discuss what additional information and parameters you need to account
      for to achieve a fair comparison based on a common functional unit.

Exercise 5.2: Human Health Impacts Due to
Respiratory Inorganics and Climate Change
Use the inventory data in Table 5.11 for the hand-dryer comparison (originally
described in Exercises 3.2 and 4.2) to estimate the HH impacts for each scenario
due to respiratory inorganics and global warming (using GWP 100 years), including
midpoint, damage, normalized, and weighted scores. Use the factors available in
Tables 5.12 and 5.13 and the available form (Table 5.14).

   1. Which scenario leads to a higher score for the respiratory inorganics and for
      global warming?
   2. Which of the midpoint, damage, normalized, and weighted scores can be
      summed across respiratory inorganics and global warming?
   3. What is the best scenario in terms of total weighted HH score?
