A warm welcome to this
class on healthy and sustainable foods and product,
very important topics for world that you can use them during
your career and make a lot of good. My name is Olivier Joliet. I'm a Swiss physicist
working as a professor in an Environmental Health Science
at the school of Public Health of the University of Michigan. And just to introduce myself,
what I love beyond, of course my wife and
my two sons who are now young adults, is lake and mountains. I love biking up the Swiss passes
in the Alps, I like hiking and sometime making some amazing encounters. The nature is so beautiful. I like taking photos like here, or here looking at the Lake of Geneva area,
Luzern on the area where I grew up, and where I'm from in the French
speaking part of Switzerland. That's on the professional side, I would like to introduce you
an amazing person who will co-teach or co-instruct this class with me this year. And, she is Dr. Shanna Shaked. She's Adjunct Assistant Professor
at UCLA and also a Adjunct Clinical
Assistant Professor here at UofM. She has made her PhD ten years ago. We collaborated assessing the impact
of global consumption and the impact that our consumption here,
from goods which are produced in China has impact on particulate matter emission and
impact in China itself. And you will have some
look at that together. But then, Shanna reoriented herself and found her true passion,
which is education. Her passion is you. She is now the Senior Associate Director
at the UCLA Center for Education, Innovation and
Learning in the sciences, only that. And she has set up also, and is directing
an undergraduate learning assistant program, making the assistant learning and
helping each other in an amazing way. So she is extremely good at teaching,
us as teacher how to teach, and that's why I took her with me for
this class. And is herself an outstanding
teacher you will see that. She's passionate about making
quality education available for all, and in particular helping
more people to realize and assess the impacts and the consequences
of their daily life and actions. >> Hi, I'm Shanna Shaked, I am Adjunct
Professor at University of Michigan School of Public Health and I'm the Senior
Associate Director at UCLA Center for Education, Innovation and
Learning in the Sciences. A little bit about me, my mother is
from Tunisia, my father was from Israel, my partners from the Netherlands and
I am from Arizona. I got my PhD in Applied Physics
working with Professor Juliet at the University of Michigan. I'm focusing on the human health impacts
of global consumption and global trade. And then I discovered that
teaching was my real passion. So I got a Master of Arts in Teaching,
focusing on physics. At UCLA and I founded our Undergraduate
Learning Assistant program, where we have more than 400 learning assistance
every quarter that are transforming introductory stem learning for
more than 10,000 students at UCLA. I also have two kids, and I refused to
drive a car, Even though I live in LA. So I try to bike everywhere. And I also like rock climbing and
swing dancing, but not doing both at the same time. My current mission is to empower others
to make the world a more equitable place through educational,
environmental, and social justice. Dr. Olivier Jolliet is a professor
in life cycle impact and risk modeling at the Department of
Environmental Health Sciences in the School of Public Health at
the University of Michigan. He is also one of the founders of Qantas
International, which provides lifecycle assessment expertise to companies and
governments around the world. He is a pioneer in the Field of Life Cycle
Assessment, or LCA, as you will become very familiar with it, leading teams of
researchers in designing LCA approaches, including those used by
the United Nations Environment Program. He also pioneered the application of LCA,
to food sustainability back in the early 1990s and
continues to pioneer in that realm today. He's co-authored more than 200
peer-reviewed publications or book chapters,
including one of the few textbooks on LCA. And he's taught more than
40 LCA related courses and 20 short courses for professionals. Through his work, he provides scientific
knowledge to assess environmental risks, and impacts of chemicals,
food systems and innovative technologies. As a researcher,
he's mentored 15 PhD students and I am very fortunate to
have been one of them. He is also one of the kindest and most
of compassionate people that I have had pleasure of working with.