Now we have seen the framework for
lifecycle impact assessment. How does it work in practice? How can we evaluate this impact in various impact category and
how is the process to do that? That's what we are going to do
through our car case study and front end panel example
comparing as if you remember the steel with the aluminium and
the plastic panel. So first learning objective for
this part, a one and a two define the steps of
a lifecycle impact assessment. Okay, let's look at the stepwise procedure
and then we'll take the first step and we'll then characterize the impact for
each impact category. We want to evaluate in each
different type of impact category, the score of the different scenario. We'll apply to do that imply Impact World+
at midpoint level to our car case study. And we want to identify
inventory flow with the highest contribution to impact and interpret the LCIA results
at midpoint level. So within each category we can look and
start comparing our different scenarios. Our case study is if you remember
a front-end panel which is this passive piece which is holding
the lights and different pieces, weighting about ten kilo for
steel, only 3.8 for aluminium. Which mean that we have
a consumption of about over the 200,000 kilometer service of like 80 liter for the steel gasoline and only 34 liter for
the aluminium front end panel. Okay, we had already
obtained the inventory and we were showing that the steel
is reflected in a high energy, this heavyweight and this large
consumption, high energy, high CO2. You see 253.9 compared to the other and fine particulate for example, you see 0.383 here,
which are really the highest. So steel is often the highest but
not always. You see, you have here for the lead,
we start having steel which is in fact less and lower than
the recycled aluminium which has apparently some lead process
emitted during the processes. On the other hand, the recycled aluminium
is better in most cases, but not always. Again, it's the worst
with lead in that case. So to go further than that,
we need to put things in perspective. Basically, is lead dominant impact or
it's relatively small impact? And for that, the first step
is to classify my emission and look which emission correspond
to which impact category. So we select the emission which
are relevant for each impact category. Then step two,
we do the midpoint characterization. We give a total score within this
impact category, like global warming or total score for acidification, total
score for ozone depletion, for example. And here we weight emission and
extraction using natural science based factor to look at the contribution
of each of the inventory flow to the midpoint category impact score
based on the midpoint selected for this impact category in the previous
step of classification. When we arrive to that, we finish with
about 18 different impact categories. That's a lot to take a decision. And we can take one more step,
okay which is a damage characterization, which is still science based and
natural science based. We look how each midpoint category okay, is contributing to larger damage category, which will be expressed, for
example, for human health okay and ecosystem services, and
also natural resources. That's our three main area of
protection for human health. We will express that all
in DALYs in disability adjusted life years in that case. So we want all the impact category
which are contribute to human health. That would be global warming,
ozone depletion, human toxicity for cancer and
non cancer, for example. Water use might also have some
effect on malnutrition and we can bring them on a common metric,
which is nice because it will put in perspective which one
are really important. Two other optional steps to put results
in perspective, the normalization step. Here we compare the results
of a given case study. In our case, for example,
our car case study, we compare them with the total
world emission per capita. Put in perspective that this
particular case, for example, might have higher impact on human health, because emits quite a few particulate
matter or knocks from transportation, versus other type of application,
like agriculture application, which will have more impact on
eutrophication, for example. And so comparing our case with
the world is interesting. The last point is,
if we want to start comparing across a different area of protection,
comparing human health and a year of life lost or
dally comparing to a loss of species, this cannot be compared
based on natural science. Nothing tell us the value of a species,
the intrinsic value. So to do that,
basically we need to rely on social, political, ethical values. And this is what is called a weighting
really, where we compare the damage results and start to get all
the results compare on a single metric, could be, for example, dollar or
euro, that we can have altogether. It doesn't mean we sum
everything up together. We can still keep them separate,
but we make them comparable. Okay, so the LCIA, I like to say,
is the art of comparing. And that's what we are going to do and
apply it for our case studies. So we will use for this one of the latest
method that we have developed ourselves. This is Impact World+,
published in 2019, but has been experimenting with
it since in fact 2013. And we go really from
inventory flow to damage. So we have the inventory flows,
here we go then to midpoint level, we'll move to damage level
to eventually arrive. That is,
damage kept separate in each category. We can aggregate if we want this
damage to a total human health impact. And eventually arrive to area of
concern also in a compatible way. I will come back on that. So let's start and
first step was classification. So we attribute CO2, for
example, will mostly contribute to the climate change short
term in this case, okay. Now if we take a pesticide,
it can contribute to several categories. It can contribute here to
the freshwater resources. It could contribute to the human toxicity,
cancer or non cancer, for example. And we continue on and
on I mean basically we put zero and one in a sense in a column to say okay. And put a one like a binary
classification on all the flow which will contribute to a given category. And all the other which mean
we don't need to look at it. We don't need to evaluate anything for it. So in short, the classification step
allow to dispatch the pollutants according to the impact
category they affect. CO2, methane and nitrous oxide
Are contributing to global warming. And one substance may contribute
to several impact category for example, the methane is also
contributing to photochemical ozone creation in addition
to the global warming.