Let's now apply that to
our different scenarios. Again, I've kept them separate. This time, I have everything
in Euro per functional unit. This time, I can compare
across all impact category. Here, I could take
the highest impact. Which is here, and take my two. We could go to like nearly
three orders of magnitude. Let's look at which
impact category are coming out important. We see, of course, the global warming both
for human health and ecosystem a bit
higher considered for this case study here
on human health. The water use impacts might be important to find particular not super surprising. For carcinogen, they are some
scenario which come out, in that case, and
non-carcinogen. That's for the human health, we see that in addition to
that marine ossification, this is linked to
the CO_2 emission, some water use by the
terrestrial acidification, and at the level of the
aquatic and in our case, primary energy is
also important. In term of ranking, we see clearly we find
that our usual ranking. Now, this time we can sum
up everything if we want, and we can arrive to score which we could
still differentiate. I've kept in the global warming, which are these and these here, on human health and ecosystem quality represented
bit more than half in fact, of the impact on themselves. We have the other impacts
which are coming. Total impact here
you see we arrive to a 130 euro for the steel versus about 20 euro per functional
unit for recycle aluminum. That means that you could pay your frontend battle a
substantial, I mean, nearly 100 euro more if we start counting for
this external cost. In that, we had seen that our previous impacts on
human health, where I mean, with only part of the mission
wearing that range with our $84 per euro were right
in the middle of this range. Okay, and we get our nice, I know it's waiting and we can start interpreting
and that's especially useful
when we start having more tradeoff situation here. What is the reliability
of these results? What was the driving force for the difference
between this scenario? The answer is the driving force, which was, here was my
gasoline consumption. Therefore, in fact, the difference between the
scenario is pretty robust because this is directly
proportional to my 80 liter. In the case of the steel
versus the 30.4 liter that we had here for the recycled
aluminum that we have here. I would say in this case, the variation is
primarily linked to that, there's probably a bit
more uncertainty between the two central scenario where the aluminum is requiring
for the manufacturing, and there might be a bit
more trade-off there, but they are probably
more or less comparable. You would make your decision based on price or other factors. Why don't more car
have aluminum? In fact, for the composite, most of this component nowadays are not
anymore in steel. They made the move
to compose it. Why not go to aluminum? What is the difficulty
with aluminum? In fact, when big
difficulties for accidents. Okay, steel when it breaks and plastic partly it's
absorb the energy, it get deformed in a crash. It absorb the energy. It means that if you have
a crash with a steel car, the size will be reduced. If you have that in aluminum,
it's totally rigid. If you have a shock here, the driver is getting
about the same shock. Company who are producing
aluminum base car, and there are some. They have to make it
that it will break piece-by-piece here. We'll first break here
because your soldering must be done that this
one first breaks, then this one, then this one, etc. That it
absorbed the energy. It's pretty relatively
complex process that we need to have here. Now, how robust are the different weight across the different areas
of protection? Because every individual
has a different value, different society will
have different value. This is a very interesting
study from our colleague, Norihiro Itsubo, who
is professor in Tokyo. He has developed the Japanese impacts
assessment and Line 3. We look here at the
relative importance studied in all these
different country, more than I think
23 country here. He looks at this one and ask
people how much they value, they represent it with
different example where they would put a waiting on human
health, biodiversity. Social assets are
the resources and primary productivity
is an area of protection that we don't
have any impact until 2002. Which is linked to basically
the ability to produce agriculture or resource for
burning entire forests. What is really interesting, if you look the country which are giving an
important green part. Which are until about here. High importance to biodiversity. If we look here, these are all developed
or emerging country. This is industrialized country, which are either the G20 or G8, are
industrialized country. Industrialized country,
if we have enough money, we tend to then share it
between the human health. They also have the smallest
impact given on human health. Whereas developing country or some other emerging country, where the revenue
is a bit lower, will start to see
that we have less important on biodiversity and more important on human health. You see that in this
graph as a function of the GDP per capita, by weighting factor, my importance of human
health goes down. If I have more money, the relative
importance goes down, whereas the biodiversity
is going up in this case. It's a tendency within
that every video, but that was very consistent and show that
these methods are not random. It's social science, it's
not natural science-based, it's preferences that it can be restructured in a way which
bring consistent results. Before we conclude, there is a third option beyond
nominalization and waiting, which is called grouping. I don't want to go in detail. You can read that where impact category can be grouped according to the
area of protection. We've done that in
a sense already. The type of emission of
resources or the spacial place, you can do all grouping. The problem is, which
one makes sense? That's where we need a bit
more guidance here then what ISO is providing here. Summary, waiting
enables comparison of results across area
of protection based, for example, on monetization
and conjoint analysis. This budget constraint
or conjoint analysis. We don't necessarily need to
arrive to a single score. We can keep separate
the impact per category and then identify
what is the high-impact. Present these live
second issue is working probably based on
some of the work from it's suitable to develop
default consistent weights at midpoint and damage at the midpoint to damage
will use in fact, our MDF or midpoint
to damage factor.