Interpreting results
implies also tools to find solution to
improve the products. What tool do we have
to identify what are the most efficient improvement depending on the different
types of products? A learning objective is to classify the different
types of products, and to be able to
do that in order to incorporate that in very early
stage of product design. This classification will
be based on what are the dominant life cycle
stage of the product here. We want to identify priorities for product
improvement and optimization, and list some principle
for ecodesign. Let's look how design
process happened. At the early stage of a design, you have a lot of freedom. Your potential for action
here is really high. But as the design
is progressing, you're making choices, and these choices cannot
always be reverted. Your potential and your
freedom, in a sense, is reducing as we're progressing
towards the final stage. If you realize you haven't
done a good job here, it's too late to come
back at this stage. The information available follow exactly an opposite trend, where when you start you
have little knowledge, but as you progress
your information is increasing and you can then better evaluate
your different scenario. The game is really that we
provide tools which can be valid for the early stage
as well as the final stage, taking then advantage of
the full information. We propose here to use about three different
stages of two. At the start, you have
design for environment, or product classification, or ecodesign principle that we will just look at it today. When we have made
the first choices, we have different alternative
that we can choose. The LCA screening with the energy and CO_2 balance without doing
a complete LCA, but it's very useful to compare alternative and
make initial choices. They're also accounting
possibly for the direct impact of
toxic during use phase. When you have more information, you can then perform
a detailed LCA. You could say it's too
late to do that here. Yes, probably for this product, but these can be of use
for the next product here, and will guide your design
of the next product. What we learn here is not
only for the given product, but for what is
coming in the future. Now we've seen the screening, we've seen the details here, let's go and back
up a bit and say, what would be the
priority for improvement based just on a few
observation on products? We propose you to
classify product according to the dominant
life cycle stage. Let's distinguish first
between active product. A product is considered active if the use
stage is dominant, either for the energy
or for the impact. Passive products
are product whether manufacturing and our disposal stage
dominates the impact. Second, differentiation is
mobile versus fixed product. A product is mobile
if transport stage is responsible for
the dominant impact, and is fixed if this transport
stage is not dominant. You have to be careful because mobile product can be
immobile during use stage, but have been transported
over long distance in the manufacturing,
for example. Once we have classified that, that give us an indicator,
some principle, because active
products we want to increase efficiency
or reduce emission, this is a priority. For the passive product, it's the material composition, it's the product
effective lifetime, and the material recycling
which are important. Whereas for mobile product, the weight reduction
will be essential. Let's try with a few products, and you can then continue for a larger number of
product in your activity. Let's look first
at a light bulb. We've seen that,
and the light bulb, when we did the CO_2
energy balance, was entirely dominated, in fact, by the use phase. We're typically with the light
bulb in a situation where the active and the efficiency
will be absolutely crucial. If I take a shelf or as we
have here, or a wardrobe. Then during use phase, relatively little
emission could be some impacts associated
with chemical in products but typically that would be a passive material
and passive elements. Here the material
and the weights, how long it's used will
be very important. Now, mobile and passive, do we have that? For your mobile is it
that we are active? With this definition, typically a plane seat, the efficiency is
not crucial for a plane seat but
what is crucial is the weight of the seats
that we want to minimize. In contrast, a plane reactor
will be typically here, a product which both its
efficiency and its weight because it's still on the
plane and it needs to be transported will
be very important. Then we have a whole
series of products which have combined impact
which are about equal. We've seen our laptop was slightly higher at
the manufacturing but still the use phase was
nearly half of the emission. If we take a professional
drill which is use an hour a day or
something like that, this is clearly an
active product. But when we look
at a home drill, it's not obvious that it's still active because let's
say I have my drill for about 30 years
but I'm using on average perhaps five
minutes a year, I'm really effectively
drilling some walls. Depending on the level of projects you
have in your house, your home drill might in
fact need more energy for manufacturing it than during its use stage, during its life. We can now play and you
will take the product you had touched within
the last 20 hours and then put them here on this
representation of passive, active, fixed mobile. Then it will set the
priority that for the fixed material
composition, product lifetime, reuse, repair material
cycling is important, the mobile, the weight
will be important. In that sense the laptop
we had here might be here misplaced in the sense that the home drill
doesn't move much better. Laptop in fact can
be transported over relatively large
distances if you use it in intercontinental travel as I'm doing when I want
to meet with my family. Let's look a bit
more in detail at some consumer goods and what
we have as typical goods. Active products some
of our example, refrigerator, dishwasher,
washing machine, all the appliances and here we want to buy efficient
appliance here. Car parts or car we need
to reduce weight and have a low consumption car or you
want to go at least larger, nowadays we can easily
do 40 miles per gallon. My previous is at 44 on
average for example. For the passive products, we want to lengthen
the useful tool. The first thing is in
fact we can add to what we have here is reduce. Don't offer jewelry too
many too often here. For me, I've basically jewelry. There is one here, lifetime so far, 37 years. It has been used, it's not super heavy
but you've seen that the CO_2 footprint and energy footprint of gold is pretty
high so we really want to make it last for this reason and for
other reason of course. Sports goods, textile paper. Here reuse, recycle
is really good. Reuse of clothing
is more and more common nowadays and smart and, or reuse of furniture is really. The perishable goods, there the challenge is to avoid losses and on average we have close to 30 percent
losses on our food. That's the place where
we could do far better.