In summary here, this
eco-design design strategy, we can call it the
7R, which I like. First strategy, rethink
and dematerialize. Could I obtain more
service from a similar or even reduced
material quantity? What do we have as example
for dematerialization? If you look, this
was in the '80s. Early '90s, we had to
create two supercomputer. You have a picture here. This is about a ton of
material that we have here for what was the most
powerful computer here from the NASA at this time. His power was 1.9
gigaflops, 244 megahertz. An iPhone 4, which is now really old, has the same nearly property and power than this
supercomputer, 1.6800 megahertz and
weighed a few 100 grams. Is this really a success
story of dematerialization? Think about it. What's happening at that time, only the NASA had
the supercomputer. Nowadays, everybody has a
mobile phone plus a laptop. In fact, the total mass has rather increased
and the intensity or so of components in
these is really high. In fact, we might
have even increased the amount of the
mass we were using. When I started my studies in '78 at [inaudible] in Lausanne, the computer was taking
the entire floor of the family house. That was several ton. That was probably rather 10 tons of material which was there. But nowadays the way it is about comparable
of all the computer or the desktop and the PC which are presently at the
university there. It's still an objective, but we must be careful to the rebound effect
and that we will look in our next chapter
on consumption. Rethink, but also reduce. Reduce or avoid is always
better than finding solution to recycle or
end of a pipe solution. Reduce consumption during use phase with proactive product, especially, and reduce
toxics in manufacturing. For high toxic, high
active product, we want here to
reduce the quantity. If we cannot reduce, we could repair and replace
just the obsolete components. Here, desktop could be more interesting sometimes
than a laptop because you could change
your motherboard while keeping your keyboard, which is perfectly
in good shape or you can just change your hard
disk when it's obsolete. The problem is a bit
with computers that the company have interests
to make it obsolete. The optimization of program, especially in the Windows
or Macintosh world is not good because they
have interests that we use more Linux for
that is much more parsimonious and you could use much older machine
and in a perfect way. Let's also reuse. If material extraction and production phase
are substantial, we can increase the product
lifetime and reuse parts. Is it always positive to
increase the lifetime? Be careful because for products which have
high efficiency, it's okay unless the efficiency and new duration has increased. So increasing the lifetime of an incandescent light
bulb is not smart. This one you need to replace and substitute them
with LEDs nowadays. That's it. You don't want to keep
also necessarily, always for active product, old products in that case. Eventually you can
look at recycling. But this is an end
of pipe solution and there are trade-offs
between recycling and how far you
need to transport. Because you cannot
recycle on-the-spot. You need to concentrate and bring things together
for a recycling facility. There are two kinds of goods which are really
interesting to recycle. Either very valuable components, like precious metal, which could be in electronics
or also very toxic. That's interesting to see that either of them are important. But again, we will have trade-off
with transport emission. For example, we see plastic. The plastic contains
about 40 megajoules and other 40
megajoules for energy. A recycled plastic requires
probably half of the energy, about 40 megajoules per kilogram that we can save by
using recycled plastic. Is that important compared
to transportation? Transportation is two megajoules
for 1,000 kilometers, and that's by truck. If you go by freight, it's even less than that. It's really worth
here to recycle this high-energy
content material and try to substitute
new material.