Healthy and
sustainable foods and products. Many people are nowadays
speaking of sustainability, many companies, many governments,
but how good are we doing? How can we quantify that? This is exactly the goal of
this course series to enable you to have the tool to evaluate
whether product policy or some diets are sustainable,
good enough for an environment and
bringing improvement for our health also. So to reach this goal we
need to partner for that and I would like to partner with you to enable
you to work the rest of your career, the 40 years of your coming career towards
more healthy and sustainable products. And we want you to achieve maximum
benefits from your learning experience. For that we commit to share with our
passion towards improving our health and the environment and I am persuaded that you will not be bored
because we'll take practical example, the different teacher in this course
have passion for what they are doing, and that will be I think interesting and
related to our daily life. We welcome your question,
comments on the social media, your ideas that you can build an exchange
with peers in that course. We will enable you to assess your learning
in a timely manner with weekly quizzes, a lot of practice that you can experience
and we want to partner with you so that you learn and master several
science based tools to support decision making towards more healthy and
sustainable products. We also expect certain things,
we expect an active engagement and motivation to learn from each other and
the question you can ask on social media are very useful to other and
and your inputs will be useful. We expect a thoughtful work
on your activity, case study, and you will learn by doing
not just by listening. We want the learning environment
which is supportive of diversity, equity, and inclusion. Basically what we would like
is a lot of respect for each other and
respect is the basis then to learn to challenge sometimes each other
in a constructive way and we want this constructive, this honesty, this respect for
ideas of opinion among each each other. And of course for the assignment we
want that they reflect your own work. There is no sense to copy or cut and
paste things from the internet without quoting them properly because that
deserve you basically for your learning. So please when you use something from
the internet or from a colleague site, others in a proper way that we can
trace the sources of what you bring. What is our learning style? This is a learning by doing. Will have short introductory videos for
each new subject with some illustrative example but
you will primary do activities and practices to explore and
deepen your understanding. We'll have individual works and
a lot of different small activity and also larger activity like especially for
the life cycle cause a case study which can be chosen
according to your interest. And all that we will have as recap
to solidify our understanding and integrate the different content, weekly quizzes and
exams of each week of the course. The work organization,
this course is basically not difficult but what makes it a bit challenging
is that we cover a considerable amount of material at a rapid pace. So you will need to often review
the material multiple time and videos ideal for that. And you can see also in the practices
you usually get the answer key, you can check what you have done, learned
from the material which is available, and we expect this engagement
with the activity and case study which enable you to work well. Calculation remains simple. We multiply and add numbers. What is not that easy is sometimes
to know what needs to be multiplied, and what needs to be added,
what can be added? And then we learn that together through the different concept of
life cycle based research. We are using so many products in a day. Okay, so when you wake up
you have a coffee machine, you have so
many products you are touching, you are using a bus or bike or
a car to transport yourself. You have shoes to get out. So, so many products
are integral part of our life. How can we assess the environmental
impact and improve, reduce the impact. This is the goal of this
third course on environmental life cycle of assessment of products and
services. We'll start from real life problems and
look how many products you have been in contact
with in the last 24 hours. We look at practical example and
ask ourselves how environmental friendly is
popcorn as a packaging material, that's an original proposal that
some growers have been working on. What is best to dry your hands? You arrive in the toilets and
you have towers and electric hairdryer. Which one do you choose? And how can I access the environmental
impact of the 100,000 of products on the shelves
of your supermarket? And finally how to compare different
type of impacts, climate change impact, human health impact of fine particulate. How do we bring that together
in a consistent way and a comparable way that
we can assess together. The menu to address this
question will be an introduction to product LCA with packaging examples,
some history of LCA. To move to the first phase,
which is the goal and scope definition sounds why do
we need to define the scope. That's where in fact through the choice
of product system boundary for example, the choice of unit we are using
to compare product or the functional unit. This in fact could buy a study or
bring consistency in the study and we'll learn good rules for that. We'll move then to the next chapter which
is making an inventory of the resource use, resource extraction and
emission over the entire life cycle. And we'll take as an example
a car life cycle inventory, we learn which databases
are available as you starting LCA. To use LCA you have many
more data than when I started 30 years ago to work on that. Once we have this emission to air
water soil across the whole life cycle we can compare this emission and evaluate
their impact on different type of impact, be it climate change,
eutrophication on the environment. Fine of particular for
human health impact or toxicology or ecotoxicology that we we will look at. And finally we interpret the results
through computer example, for example you will learn also
to use an LCA software and perform a real case study in that case. For all this in fact we
made that available for a while and now my LCA textbook, and that is built on 25 years
of LCA teaching and complement the class. In fact the class follow more or
less the same and so you prefer to read, you can go there and and
further discover the beauty and also the limitation of
this LCA system approach. What will you get when
you finish that course? You will be able to assess
the environmental impact and systems of products and systems over the
whole life cycle from cradle to grave or even from cradle to cradle
when we recycle product. We will know how to define the golden
scope for consistent comparison, build this life cycle inventory
of 400 emissions for example, determine life cycle impact. Know about the different methods for
characterizing impacts and damages and interpret results so
that if you read LCA or someone else or
when you perform your LCA you can have a critical way to see how
consistent is that LCA, what are the critical points
you should need to look at. So in summary we will
interact together and let's interact through social
media to maximize your benefits. You will learn by doing, so don't
expect just to sit listen to video and that's sufficient. I bring you quantitative and practical tools that mean
also please do the practice. Please do the Excel calculation
when you're asked for, that's how you will really synthesize and
integrate the knowledge of that class. And that's where our learning
style is problem solving oriented. We often start from problem
to look at the tool and you will have available free
textbook like this textbook, different papers but
also model and tools available. In the end our common goal is let's
contribute together to make our world a better place, things which
is desperately needed nowadays.