How to use the dollar sign as a very
efficient way to perform calculation and to copy formula in the next cell sheet. Because we want to put for even a large
range of formula to write the formula in a single sheet and be able to copy it and
that it adjusts the right way directly. Let's take a small example. We have here three people which
are consuming 10 serving a day, 20 serving a day and 30 serving
a day of two different food one and two each of them is
consumed at the same level. And we have here the carbon
footprint of these two foods. The food one has 0.1 kg of
CO2 per serving whereas food two has 0.5 kg of CO2 per serving. We would like to calculate
the carbon footprint in kilo CO2 per day which means taking
the serving per day. Multiplying it by
the kilo CO2 per serving. So we'll get a kilo CO2 per
day serving are going away. So to do that I will say my
cell C7 is equal here to my consumption B7 time my
carbon footprint data and kilo CO2 per serving for
food one which is C3 here. So 10 times 0.1, this is 1 it makes sense. So now as we want to be efficient or
if we are lazy or both let's take that and
we want to copy it. You can copy with CTRL C and CTRL V, okay. Or directly take here the corner and
take it down and we see we're having a problem here. Why are we having a problem, let's look
what happened when I copied my formula. I had B7 times C3,
I would like to have here B8 times C3. But I get B8, so this has adapted nicely, it move automatically from B7
to B8 when I move a row down. But my C3 has also adapted. So I'm trying to use a text here. So Excel doesn't like that. If you make a multiplication with the text
it doesn't know how to handle that. So what I would like is that we
block these three remains the same. I always use is C3 here
when I come down so to block that this is exactly
what the dollar sign in Excel inside the formula is doing it
will enable that when I move copies this cell down it will
remain C3 all the way through. So let's look how it
looks now I take here I copy it down and now I have 20 times 0.1. This is 2, 30 times 0.13,
let's look at what it changed. We have B7 times C3,
B8 we're using this one and we stayed at C3, okay. And here here we also
have D9 times C3 that we have exactly the same way and
which is correct. So now again I would like to be efficient. I would like to take this formula here and
just copy here to the right, okay I should have here 0.5 times 10. That should be 5 on on cell D7. I should have 5 here,
I should not have 0.5. What happened this time here,
I would like to calculate here. D3 times B7 but when I copied to the right the B7 became C7. So I'm using these cells instead
of using you see I'm using that cell times that cell instead
of using this original cell. So what I can do is I can
this time block the column. So I put a dollar in front of the B here. Okay and now I press enter and now I can copy here this
cell to that one and now I'm getting 5 because
I'm still using B7 here. Okay and I'm using D3 here,
so that's what I want. So now the beauty of that is why
I write the formula only once. Okay, my formula here and
I copy it on the anti range and you get let's take the corner
here 30 times 0.5. That should be 15 and that's what
we are getting here will be B9. So the B has adjusted here in the role but it has not adjusted when I moved here. We were already at D9 here
when I was changing column and the D now is blocked here for the row that
has been adjusted with the column here. So here we could calculate or total
footprint we do the sum of these two or we could say one or the other but
the some been able to do many to so many cells and we get 6, 12, 18, here. That was when I was blocking only
one of the row or one of the column. But what about if I want let's go here and now I would like to go and
go instead of per day. I would like to do a per
year footprint that we have here and this per year footprint. I would in fact avoid
recalculating everything but directly take my results per day and
multiply it by a conversion factor in day per year and
notice that I put a separate cell or that I didn't write 365.25 in the cell. This is not good practice because if for
example you change to 365 or 365.25 you want to do it and change
a single cell and everything is adapted. So never put a number in a formula,
never say this is equal to the carbon footprint per year
is a carbon footprint per day. Never do that C7 times 325 for
example 365. Okay and then you don't
realize that perhaps this time you do 365 the next time the 365.25. So no, don't put here a number often
you will don't remember what is this number here is easy but
it could be more complicated. You create a conversion factor and
you multiply by that. So here C7 times C11 we take that. Now if I want to copy
it on the entire range, I would like as I'm getting lazy or
efficient. I would like to always keep these 365.25
when I moved down or when I move right. So in that case I will
put the dollar in front of both the column and the role number and now I have blocked myself C11, okay. And I can copy that here,
copy that here, okay. And here I can see 10 times 365.25 this is 3652 .5. And you see that we're still using
the same fixed factor here 365. So again, I was only writing
the formula in a single cell and could copy it all the way through here.