Now that we know
how to aggregate the different
elementary flow across the entire supply chain and
get aggregated results, I would say cradle to gate
for different material, it's very interesting to
compare the primary energy we are getting or
the CO_2 emission. But to do that, we first need to define well, what type of energy
because there are several term which are used
for describing the energy. We want to define as a
learning objective primary, final, and useful energy. Second, we will then compare aggregated processes
for primary energy for various materials
and processes. Let's look at this definition. Primary energy is
defined as the energy contained in the energy carrier at the point of extraction. It's the total energy
you extract from the environment and that will include the upstream
energy usage that you need to
do the extraction, to do the refinery, the preparation, and to
distribute all that. You need to extract
all that so that you have the final
energy which is delivered to the consumer or purchased by the consumers if we take his or her
point of view. The final energy is what is consumed whereas the
primary energy is what needs to be extracted to deliver this energy consumed. The useful energy
is the portion of the final energy
which is actually delivered inside the
house for example, or available after
final conversion for the respective
use of the consumer. Let's look at an example
to understand that. Let's take natural gas first. We have here some
gas and I buy one megajoule final which
is at my gas meter. First, what's happening
when you have a heating, usually you have a
small stack on the roof and you in fact are
ejecting some heat. The efficiency will be
a key parameter here which will relate the final
energy to the useful energy. For a gas heater it has a recuperation of condensation which most of
modern heater have, you get a high efficiency. You can get like 95
percent efficiency so one megajoule final,
0.95 megajoule useful. How much energy do you
need to produce that? You might have a tanker
or the pipeline, have some losses
on the pipeline, you need to transport that. You will have order of magnitude 1.2-1.25 megajoule primary
per megajoule final. Now let's move to electricity. One megajoule final, how much in the house?
Hundred percent. Everything degrade in heat. You get here one
megajoule useful, so great, 100 percent
efficiency for the electricity. That's pretty good. Now, what upstream
from the electricity? The electricity is high exergy, high-quality and we
measure the quality of energy in exergy which is the potential to create mechanical energy
with this energy. Electricity has more than
95 percent potential for creating the
mechanical work, much higher than heat. But that means that
when you want to transform heat into high exergy, you have losses and
substantial losses. In fact, we are heating the part at either
nuclear power station, gas power station, or coal power station; you have these big
towers and you will lose about 2/3 in the
atmosphere or you have your longer
lake or river and you will heat fishes in that
case and heat the water. One megajoule final, 3.4 mega joule primary
are necessary. Who was saying that for
heating electricity is a good idea and efficient
because in fact, it's a ratio of 3.4:1? Again approximately 1.3:
1 delivered in the house. The gas is much more efficient and should
be kept for heating, whereas electricity should
be kept for producing mechanical work in cars or different application
in our case. Now, electricity
is often expressed not in mega joule but
in kilowatt hour final. That's what usually you buy. As you have 3,600 seconds and a joule
is watt times second, we have in fact, one kilowatt-hour final
is 3.6 megajoule final. One kilowatt-hour final, one kilowatt-hour useful but
in terms of primary energy, this will be in fact 3.4 and these are
megajoule primary per megajoule final time
the 3.6 we have here which is megajoule final
per kilowatt-hour final. When you get that, you get 3.4 times 3.6, this is equal to 12.1 mega joule primary energy per kilowatt-hour
final in that case. You have to be really
careful that we always say what type of energy
we are using. What are the typical values for different ores or
energy vectors, energy carrier that
you have available? We have a whole survey
which is around 40 here. Down here kerosene, light fuel, heavy fuel oil. The oil-based material
are around 42, 43 megajoule per kilo,
relatively high density, higher than for example, the bio-gas or the
hard coal or the lower quality coal which is even
lower here which can be even lower than 10
megajoule per kilogram. This is useful. When we want to calculate the primary energy, we will take the amount of crude oil extracted and
multiply by this value, and that will give us this total megajoule
primary energy extracted.