If we come back
to our case study about the lighting case
study and light bulb, what was the dominant process which could dominate
the carbon footprint or the energy footprint
of a lighting operation? Is it the manufacturing
of the bulb? Is it the usage? Is it the disposal
which are important? How does that vary
when I move to a fluorescent or LED bulb? To do that, this is
a sense of studying the primary energy
and CO_2 balance, and we will first do it, I would say by hand or with
Excel on a spreadsheet. Before moving to more
complex LCA, software. Learning objectives
are to establish the primary energy and CO_2
balance of a product system. Second, in part B of
this presentation, we'll check the consistency of inventory data using
grams CO_2 per megajoule primary
energy resources extracted as a check
instrument in our heads. Let's recall and remind
that we have already done when we build
our product system, we have already
built-up process tree. In each of the processes, we have put the amount like
100 gram of glass was used, which was five bulbs
times 20 gram per bulb and we have built
our product system. Now the question is, how can we from that, use these processes to estimate based on database
data on each of the N processes of
this process tree? How can we build a full balance? The principles are simple. We will follow the upstream and downstream
intermediary flow like when we built our system and combine that
with LCA processes. When we were building
our process tree, we built it until reaching this process covered
by an LCA Data. That's why we will call them
here database processes. So the steps are we
list these n processes. This was in the process tree. Then we find for each of these database the
elementary flow per unit of each of these
database in that case and we multiply it
by the amount of each database processes
professional unit to get the contribution
of each process to energy and CO_2 balance. Then we can sum up across all these different processes and arrive to the
total primary energy and CO2 emitted per
functional unit. Then we will check the
consistency between fossil CO_2 emission and
non-renewable primary energy. Let's apply it to our
incandescent light bulb, a case study. Look how it looks like. What are the N processes? These are the one we will rely for upstream to
go in a database, and this is here glass. We have aluminum, 75 gram for the five bulbs, the tungsten, 3.5 grams, the energy, primary energy. We had also 5 times
10 gram of paper. This 50 gram or 0.05
kilograms here. We have as the main flow
during the use stage, 300 kilowatt-hour electricity
we are consuming. We also have landfill
processes at the end of life where each of the material used will be eventually
disposed in the landfill. The addition we had
transportation and transportation was calculated as weight
transported times the distance, which was the 731
kilo time kilometer not per kilometer
time kilometer. If the database are giving
the data per ton kilometer, we have to divide that by 1,000, so this is 0.731 time kilometer. Here we will have
2.285 time kilometer transported for the
oceanic freight.