Okay, so
with step one we have now end processes. We have identified and
we put them in a spreadsheet. So we've put each of
these end processes and now we will complement
with the quantity here. As it's easier to do it
directly in a spreadsheet, I will invite you to open your
spreadsheet with the energy and CO2 balance for the lighting example,
and let's do it together. So you might pause a minute until
you have opened your file. Okay, so let's look at this spreadsheet. And first we need the amount of
glass that was five time 20 g. So this is 100 g or 0.1 kg. The packaging was five time 10 g or
0.05 kg 50 g. The truck we said it was 0.731, which is t km that we have here. And for the freight we have 2.285 t km. We had our 300 kWh a which was our
reference flow for the electricity. And we've given the amount which goes
to the disposal at the end of life. So the next step now is to
get how much energy here and a bit here to the right how much C02 is
used per kilo glass ,per kilo aluminum, or per kilowatt hour to
calculate that in that case. And then we combine these two
flows to get the third floor. So the glass, let's look back and we have in our previous lecture we
had look at some typical data and we can go back inside the eco
invent data to file to look for these different processes and
bring them back here. Okay, so we look for paper,
we have typically around 20 MJ per kilo paper and
1 kg CO2 typically. That's about one fourth of the plastic. By the way,
order of magnitude glass 11.5 and 0.63. This is much less than the kilo
aluminum that we have all ready seen. Electricity was 12.1, 3.6 MJ per kWh times 3.4 that is
used to hit the birds or the fishes and
0.71 kg C02 per kWh in that case. For the transportation, 1t km or 1000 km will be 2.6 MJ. Whereas transportation,
this is by truck or lorry, transportation via transoceanic freight is more than
a factor 10 lower with 0.17 only. So we couldn't really have longer
distances without that much energy for the transportation by freight. And C02 is also here
a factor 15 nearly between the transportation and
the transoceanic freight. You have to be careful when you look
in the according that database, which scenario and
which process you want to choose. You see that for the truck 16 to 30
tons of useful load that we have here. We have two processes. One is called operation and
the other is transport. And you see the unit only
the transport is in 10 kilometer and it's really measuring
the transportation function. Whereas the operation is in fact
just the use phase contribution and it's expressed per vehicle kilometer. So it's how much vehicle needs as energy
to transfer for one kilometer, but just In fact in terms of the fuel,
whereas the building of my truck, the manufacturing of my truck and
the manufacturing of the road is not accounted for here, but
will be accounted in my transport. So please please use the transport
value and you see that's where we find the 2.6 and 0.5 here and for
the transoceanic freight the same, we have 0.17 whereas here the unit
were the same for operation. You see that the infrastructure and
the boat are not completely negligible, there's still like 25% of the whole and
that's the number we get. So let's remember these numbers and now we will bring them and
introduce them in our spreadsheet. Okay, so for
the glass we were saying 11.5 mega joule per kilogram the paper was
at 20 mega joule per kilogram. Our truck we said was at 2.6
mega joule per kilogram, whereas for the freight we were
substantially lower with 0.17 and that give us for the energy for the C 02. I've already introduced
some of them the 0.63 9.5. We just have the truck with 0.15
kg C 02 per ton kilometer and 0.104 for the transoceanic freight. So now the last operation we need is
multiply the quantity per function. Need time the energy per unit to
get the energy per functional unit. So this will be equal to 0.1 time 11.5. That should be about 1.15
mega joule per functional unit. And you see that this is
substantially less than aluminum. Even if the mass was 25% lower,
the emission at a factor 15 higher. So we get 12 mega joule or
higher contribution from my aluminum for the manufacturing than for my glass. And we do the same for the C02 we can multiply the quantity
of glass we have in our bulb, in our five bulbs time,
the emission of C 02 per kilo glass. And we get relatively
small value in that case. So now what is interesting is let's
compare that with the use phase and we have our 300 kilowatt to time,
12.1 which was a mega joule per kilowatt. A primary energy accounting for
the losses at the power plant. And so
we get here three hundreds Time 12.1. Will that be substantially higher
than the manufacturing of the bulb? Yes, okay, we get If I come back here, we had 19 mega joule over
the entire supply chain. And we're adding 3630. So we go to 3,649 here. So the use faces representing
99.5% of the total. And if we look at the C02 side for the electricity,
we have 0.71 here and this is 200. Whereas the rest of the life
cycle was only about one kilo C02 So again completely
dominated with 99.5% of my mission taking place
during the use phase. So this is this is very obvious
that in our case the priority for improving this product is clearly not so
much the lifetime of my bulbs, but the reducing the consumption per
lumen is really the important thing is that the interest of moving towards
fast fluorescent and eventually LED as alternative
to my incandescent bulb. Okay, so let's come back and
look at the results. And if we summarize what we have done we
have introduced based on the process tree. The quantity per functional unit
multiplied by the database corresponding data of mega joule and C02 per kilo of glass or
quantity of each unit quantity of each of the end processes. And we get the total,
we sum it up in operation three. And we get here the performance of
my system which are always measured per functional unit. This will be how many mega
joule per functional limit. How many kilo C02 per functional unit,
which is substantial here, even for a single lighting fixture or
light bulb over five years in this case.