So now it's interesting to
use the primary energy and the CO2 balance both of them together. And check the data that we have
obtained for light bulb example and check that using the gram CO2
per megajoule primary energy. Let's look how to do this. The first thing is when we look at
different types of fuels like coal for example, the energy
content is associated with the number of hydrogen
bonds we have in our fuel. Whereas the carbon emission associated
with a number of carbon atoms. So if we look at coal,
we have in fact a lot of carbon atoms for restricted number of hydrogen bonds. And we have in fact only half the number
of hydrogen compared to the carbon. If we have now oil,
we still have quite an important part of carbon but
we have far more hydrogen and we have two hydrogen hydro atoms for
one carbon. CH4 four methane, one C,
four H, so ratio of 4 to 1 and for the hydrogen,
this is the ideal situation, where we only have hydrogen and that means when we oxidized
the hydrogen H become H2O. Okay, and with H2O,
it means out of a fuel cell motor vehicle, we will only have as an emission water,
which is really cool to only have that because
pollution will be limited. So the question is why don't we have
all our motors with fuel cells? And the answer is it's great for
the car itself, but we don't get renewable hydrogen. We don't find hydrogen like that. We need to produce it. And to produce it, we are using usually
natural gas and then create the hydrogen. And when doing that, we will lose
the carbon, which also will emits CO2. So literally the present
solution unless we find renewable sources to produce the hydrogen. What is important here is
the ratio of CO2 emissions, but mega joule energy is associated
because of this carbon to hydrogen ratio with the ratio of H to C. This provide us a way to check that. It means all fuel will have
quite a fixed ratio and that enables us to check the data. This ratio has been
changing with time with and since the first models in the 1840, we had about 0.85 ton
carbon per kilowatt here. And in 2020 we are at 0.45. So nearly a factor to
over nearly 200 years. So progress is important, but
relatively slow, when we look at that. Now, to check our data, let's look at all the data from
the ecoinvent database. And we look here at
the grams CO2/megajoule, non renewable energy on the left side. And what we see is many of the processes are working close to what
we have here with oil. Okay, oil is here nearly our
reference with 65 gCO2/MJ, nonrenewable primary energy. And you see it's logic that plane,
road transportation, oil based material and
many of the materials are related to oil. There are oil based or using gasoline and in that case this ratio will always be the
same because when you burn the gasoline, it will emit the carbon proportional
to the number of carbon atoms. Now, compared to that, we can see
that coal here is a bit higher and that around 80 gCO2/MJ. And that reflects that coal
had a higher number or proportion of carbon atom,
gas on the contrary is about 50 g/CO2. Small reduction but
still important compared to oil, which means natural gas is
pretty good here for heating. What deviates from that? Okay, on the low end we have nuclear
power, which in terms of carbon emission is really great because
as you are using nuclear energy, there is no combustion of carbon. And in that case we don't have emission
apart from building the power plant, which is very small compared to the amount
which is produced over lifetime. That means that the electricity here
in Switzerland or in Europe is lower. Whereas in US we have so much coal in
the power plant that we reach nearly 0.6. That would be about here for
the electricity in the US. So not really better than oil in
our case here for the US situation. We have two things which are interesting, the oil based material
are around here 30gCO2/MJ, why? Because the carbon is still
inside my plastic and will only be released when we
incinerate for example our plastic. So if we incinerate it will go after
incineration up to the 65 gCO2/MJ. But if we put it in a landfill, at least
for the next 50,000 years we will keep or at least a few 1000 year,
we will keep the plastic and the emission overall will remain at
the 30 gCO2/MJ, that we have here. Fuel without combustion. Then nearly everything is inside the fuel. We just have the supply chain which
was about 20% of the emission. So we are around 10 here
gCO2/MJ in that case. Now, what's happening on the high end? You see here, cement concrete mortar,
are really high compare to the other. So there is something different happening. When I asked the question why people say, that's because concrete
requires a lot of energy. That's true. But that should go the other
direction because we divide by the non-renewable energy. Okay, so if we have would have
high energy and high CO2 emission, this should be about the same as the rest. So the answer is elsewhere. The answer is that cement is made of what,
it's made of carbon, it's made of calc. And when we put the cement inside a wall
or it's liquid, when it will solidify, we have a chemical reaction which make
it become solid and really holding well. And this is where the carbon
atom are emitted and generate important emission of CO2 in
this drying period of the concrete. Okay, so this is the reason that we are about a
factor of three higher than with the oil. The hydraulic is interesting. Okay, the hydraulic energy is
interesting because it's higher and you think why a renewable
energy would be higher. Because we are looking only at
the megajoule nonrenewable here. And that means the hydraulic energy
has very low CO2 emission and very low non renewable. But the ratio is high because
we need to build the dam and the dam is partly or made out of concrete. And that bring it at a relatively
high level compared to the rest. That shows very well,
don't use this ratio for measuring the performance of a given
technology is just to check the data. The performance must be
measured per functional unit. Okay, not a ratio here between two flows. But this ratio is very
useful to check the data.