So let's now come back to our bulb and
let's check the data that we had. And we can check with this ratio
of gram CO2 per mega joule all the different individual
database flows that we had. So if we take the glass that we had here,
how do we calculate the ratio? We had 1.2 mega joule per functional unit 0.6063 kg CO2 perfection in unit. So that will be in fact
if we take time 1000 to get gram that will be 63 g
CO2 divided by 1.2 mega joule. And this is equal to
the number we have here 53 gram CO2 per mega joule
that we have here and now we can check each of these data. We have the 53 here and aluminum is
around 59 if I jump here packaging 50. So all these number are really
reasonable between 50 and 69. The tungsten here is relatively
high when you look 95. And that means we might have some
inconsistency in the database. Pretty likely in that case
which can sometimes that come that the mega joule renewable
come from a different source and the CO2 and
that would be need to be checked here. And so this is the beauty of that. We can start identifying where we
have problems don't look too much at this ratio for the disposal because in
the disposal phase you can have carbon which were fixed inside
the material which are released. So we could have very huge
amount released per my joule. The disposal requires only
a little energy in that case. So we lose in the disposal this fixed
ratio here now very important as I say, don't look at that for the check,
this is step number four but for comparing result that was
step number three we rely on and we will compare to other scenario. We will rely here on the energy
per functional unit. The CO2 emitted per functional unit. So all comparison are always
made per functional unit. So if we summarize our data
check that we can rely on we can say most of oil, diesel cars and petrol in transportation
which are oil based gas line will work around 55
g CO2 per mega joules. And that includes the 10 g
of pre combustion that we have to make our fuel available
from primary to final energy natural gas around 50 about 85 for
the coal and electricity us we say is also very
close to 60 g zero to Per mega joule. So not very great in that case. When I get value with plastic,
if I find a value of 30 this means this is only the manufacturing if
I find a value of 60 g CO2 Per mega joule this means that
incineration has been considered and when it's landfill we probably at least
on the shorter term of 100 years or a few 1000 years only will only have
the 30 g emitted during the manufacturing. Concrete and cement around
200 g of CO2 per mega joules. Other things,
many of the other are in fact at 65 g CO2 per mega joule non repairable. Beware if you get a negative number, okay, that's if your number is
negative at the bottom here, it means that only fixation
of non fossil CO2 has been considered and
I might have a problem. So negative member it means
that that's why I'm using usually only the fossil CO2 in the balance
knowing that if it's negative, it will be released back at one point or
another. So I don't need to
consider it separately or you need to be very sure your database has
all the re-emission at the end of life. If you get a number of around
10 g of CO2 per mega joule very likely the combustion is not considered. And that's very useful to check
papers when it's not yours and to know what people have done. And if plastic around 30 g of CO2 per mega
joule, this would be that incineration emission have not been considered all
plastic is deposited in my landfill. So let's conclude this section
on the energy balance. The primary energy balance and
inventory of CO2 emission is calculated by multiplying the amount
of each database process by the aggregated emission per kilo or
per unit of this database process. And we sum up to get the total. So it's a simple way and
I like to do it in Excel in any new LCA. First before moving to LCA software
because I can check my data, I can compare it and
we will do that in our practice after. Energy content and
carbon are related. And it means that the ratio of
gram CO2 to prime a joule non renewal prime energy can you be used to check
consistencies or inventory data. Crucial to account for
additional resources either during the use phase in combustion emission or during
disposal in the incinerator emissions.