Where to find consistent and
high quality data. How how can we recognize what data, good quality and
where the place to find them. This is our goal for today. And the learner objective is
to describe the different life cycle inventory database
which are available. It's to illustrate the data
format of one specific and mostly used database,
the ecoinvent database. The database is to recognize
different types of data and energies based inventory flows and
use them adequately. And finally, to identify source for
direct data, life cycle inventory, data collection,
LCI for life cycle inventory. Good.
So, first in the life cycle inventory database, we have two types of modeling
which are answering different questions. The first time is the attributional LCA. Where we look at a product and
we look at what are the share of the activity
in the world that have really contributed to that product. So can be attributed,
allocated to the given products. What is the average share of the impact
that this product is responsible of? And for this we use typically
average electricity mix that we consider because if
this process use electricity, we assume that it will
use the same share of electricity as the other in the same mix. Making with the same proportion between
nuclear gas power plants or hydro that we get our coal power plant that we
get this average sort of contribution. The other approach is
called consequential. And in consequential approach, you want to study what is
expected to change, okay? In the environmental impact
when suddenly you add a product to the present economy, okay? So, when producing consuming and disposing
the product, what are the change? So you want to identify marginal change, here marginal is a key word. And it means you will look, for example, if I add a certain
electricity consumption, what is the likely additional
technology which will either for example, in the growing market is likely
that the new plants are gas power plant. So you will use only electricity from gas. Or if you are in a decreasing market, it's likely that coal power plants
are the ones which are fazed off and which will be considered for
the marginal change here. You have to be careful when you
do consequential because you have the risk that you are only
taking marginal change. But within the time of
your product system, if you study for
example electricity production or energy production,
a power plant will stay 40 years. During 40 years, it's unlikely
that the change are marginal. So personally, I'm a bit more tendentially
using by default attributional. But I have colleagues who are very
strongly in favor of consequential but it really depends on
the type of question and I would say the timescale of
the product you are looking. If you're just looking
at one point in time or if you're looking on the longer
term of the decision. So now, where do you find
life cycle inventory data? And to do that first you rely on
existing databases if you can. Because it's a lot of work to make your
data some people are really good at that. But when you do that and you use database
for all your background processes the one you don't study perhaps in priority you
need to ensure consistency between data. Data coming from two different database. You have to be very careful if you
mix them in in a common LCA here. The good news is a lot
of data are available. The bad news is which one to choose
because you need to make choices because you have several possibilities sometimes. Second, you could adapt existing
data to your product or services. And accounting from what type of
technology and three technology is really important and the age of the technology or
the country or region studies. I think the type of
technology is more important. I was told by people from
the aluminum production for example, that it's not very relevant where
the plant is in China or in South America. But it's very relevant
if the plant has been built after 2010 or in the 90s. In contrast to some of the, for
example, the plant which have been built in Canada and in Switzerland
which are substantially older plant and with not as efficient
technology than the new one. And then if you don't find the data,
[INAUDIBLE] you can collect new LCI data. This is especially for the foreground
system which is under the control of the industry you are studying or
the product you are studying. For that it's hard work and
you need to be systematic. This is really underlying twice
because this is really important. I'll come back on that. Now, I'm very I mean interested,
and proud of what the life cycle initiative has been doing colleague
work on our life cycle inventory. I'm really especially from
life cycle impact assessments. Not so much of inventory. But 20 years ago working on life
cycle inventory we were thinking that we needed in addition to a scientific
society which was at that time SeaTac the society for
Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry. That we would really profit
to have an institutional partner who will motivate
people to expand either for impact assessment or for the inventory,
the availability of data. And we wrote an email in May 1999 to UN. And at that time the UN secretary Kofi
Annan had just mentioned the importance of supply chain. So in two weeks, we were in Paris and we really started with the colleague and the director of the UN environmental
program Mrs. Jaqueline Aloisi de Larderel. We started in fact what is now called the
life cycle initiative has been running for the last 20 years and has now produced
this global LCI data access network. Where you can put data set you're
looking for strawberries you search and here you see you find 74
data asset worldwide. Here you have dataset from Japan but
you have the ecoinvent dataset which are there and you know what exists
basically all the main datasets are there. This is really cool that
didn't exist even a year ago. It's two months old and really precious. Just to have a look at that and
a small demo. Let's go on their website and
see how it's working. Okay, so you arrive here the global
LCA data access network. And you can search a dataset and let's take coconut as an example
that we could search. So we searched datasets for coconuts. And you see that you get a lot of dataset, 203 dataset that you have here. And that goes from
Japanese that I said here. Which could be all sorts of
use of coconut here, soap, synthetic detergent here for coconut oil. You will have some eco invent
processes with different perhaps type of allocation which are here,
and so. So that's a bit intimidating in some
respect to have so many process you have in fact 20 pages here of 21
pages of different existing process. So perhaps if you're interested more in milk alternative you
can put in quotes like coconut milk for
example and search for it. And in addition here you have here
two datasets which have coconut milk. And you have some filters you can look
the one which are free or for sale. You can look the location here,
it's only France. But when you're want coconuts you
would have all sorts of data. And there are these two datasets
are here from French database, the AGRIBALYSE database that we have here. And you have the coconut milk itself,
okay? And you can start looking at
the description of this process. Or you also have in that case
a chicken with curry and coconut milk sauce where
it's part of the process. And I think in this AGRIBALYSE
databases the process is there and you could look at it. If you go to the dataset
you press here and you arrive if you select the English
as a language to some documentation. You can get the spreadsheet of
all the raw agricultural product. You can look for the column when
you have everything in English. This is at farm gate and
then the ready-to-eat for the product that you have here. Also you have the composition of
different means which is pretty cool. And as I say you can there
find where to access the data. This dataset is in fact
available in semi-pro. So you will be able
a priority to access it for your different inventory for UK studies.