Use of ecoinvent, some
tips for good use. If you have an industrial
use of electricity, you might want to use the medium voltage and not necessarily the
electricity mix. If you have a household use, you can use a low voltage. That is just the factor. This may not so huge difference, but this is good practice or you use the overall mix
for the country. More important to take
the right country then if you don't have a
medium voltage for US, use the US mix. Transportation include the
fact that 40 percent of the trip coming
back once you have delivered your product
are done empty. In 60 percent of the cases, they are able to find another
goods to transport back, but 40 percent are empty and
it's already included in the present data per tonne kilometer that we find
in the ecoinvent database. Data and energy, we have three types of data, I think we already
looked at that. We had the per fuel
unit quantity, which is in kilo or
this one or without conversion and unless you
just study the supply chain, I would not use this data because they're
missing the main emission here. Two possibility for
what we can use, you can use your energy
per megajoule final, this is what is bought, as we have learned, and they
are called burnt processes, which include the term burn
and this is with combustion. If you still want to relate
it to the fuel quantity, you can use the net calorific
value that we have seen, when we had looked at our inventory life
cycle inventory data, where we had the aluminum 460 megajoule or the
recycle aluminum, etc, rather glass, the
gold and all that. We have done that,
we had one slide on the net calorific value
for this conversion. Cheaper megajoule useful is what is delivered inside the
house and this will be heat. This is waste
combustion and with the losses associated
with combustion, what goes out on the
stack of your house, for example, be sure you
include end-of-life processes. I recommend you only
use fossil CO2, not biogenic and be careful, you will see some suddenly
bonus or negative impacts of heavy metal uptake because the crop are taking a
metal from the soil. This is beneficial from
a soil point of view, but it forgets very
often that at the end of the life it is going in
wastewater treatment plant, it comes back on the soil, the whole cycle is not considered you don't want
to count really for it. A few more hints
Benzene emission are reported under benzene rather
than aromatic hydrocarbon, or the other organic volatile
compound are under NMVOCs, which is non methane
volatile organic compounds. Particulate emission, what really matters are the PM_2.5, the ones smaller than
2.5 micro meter. Why? Because this is thought
as really the most potent whereas those who are between 2.5 and 10 or larger than 10, this is a total particulate
matter with TPM. They don't contribute much, that's at least the
present state of science. If sometime you get only PM_10, you will just convert it
through the fraction of PM_2.5 and get the impact
always as a PM_2.5. For the CO_2 in
particular, as I say, your pragmatic solution
is to only account for fossil non biogenic CO_2 because what has been fixed is the negative
value have been fixed, is re-released back, so you don't need
to consider that. Where you need to consider
the biogenic is for the CH_4 because these come
in addition to the CO, they will degrade in CO_2
but come in addition. PAHs, here you have benzo a pyrene as a separate
emission and in a sense, PAHs is the rest of
PAHs that are reported. The dioxin and Firenze emission, are expressed as
equivalent TCDD or 2378 trichloride
dibenzodioxin emission, which has already a
weighting factor, so in a sense it's
already a sort of impact assessment results. Finally, new feature
of ecoinvent 3, we have some waterflow, We have new data set for
electricity production, including the one in the US. We can choose our modeling
strategy and to cut it short, I think you want to use the
cut-off by default databases, which from my point
of view is still the most reliable
one or called simmer browser or recycled content
unit option that you have. In the future we could have some allocation at the point of substitution and not
want to enter in detail. But the separation of
processes should first be applied so that if you have a plastic recycled
from agriculture, you don't suddenly find with the impact which go with this
plastic for the recycle. The people who are using
recycled material, you find some nitrate
because you had perhaps some crops which
were losing nitrate, which are associated
with this plastic. But the plastic itself is
not linked to the nitrate. You should have done
a separate assessment just for the plastic, but it's hard to do
and has not been. In the meantime,
to cut it short is used the cut-off models
at least for this class. Finally, we are interested in collecting life-cycle
inventory data. When we do that, first matters for primary data, you could use perhaps interviews of people who have a
lot of experience, questionnaire or survey that
you distribute in a company, you get them field. It's hard work to get them back. Bookkeeping of the enterprise
or their management system, their ERP, that is, is basically following all
what they're buying and so on. That could be interesting.
We did that in fact at University of Michigan
to do a first assessment. We look at all the spending
of the university and got statistic on that to do a
life-cycle assessment of that. That was about 10 years ago. We can use data collection
tool online after. Of course you could do
outside measurement. This is really expensive, but probably the most accurate. Secondary data we can find nowadays quite
a bit on interview, you have the privilege
to be able to do a literature search
in 10 seconds. When I did my PhD, I would go to the library, look on mic microfilm. Then select publication,
write down the title and all the coordinate
it will go to Zurich. Three weeks later
I will get back the paper and discovered was
in Japanese for example, if it arrives to me. Nowadays, it's such
a treat that we can Google search and
do these data search. When you search, you
can search for LCAs, cardboard footprint
of different items, which will work pretty well. A nice way to search
also is to come. If you find literature
source which is well quoted. You look, who is
quoting this milestone if you literature search
and you can find all, all the people that paper. I go into the list
of paper and look, Oh, this is an
interesting paper. Doing that on three
or four paper, you get a good sense of what
is there because keyword, you might miss
interesting thing. This is a nice way to do that, that generation
then you could do calculation and estimate of
emission factor for example. Here, Sonneman et al. developed by the
lifecycle initiative have some global
guidance principle, is a source which we will
post on our course website. If you do that calculation, focus on the foreground system. The foreground system is defined as the processes which are under the financial control
or operational control of a company undertaking
the product inventory. For the other processes, you try to use the
base data quality and that can be achieved by extrapolation or by simply
using a similar process. As suggested by the
greenhouse gas protocol here, it may be useful to
establish a management plan, identifying all unit processes, collecting screening
data, and refining the data collection
for those processes which are contributing to
the life cycle impact. This is typically the screening
approach you do first, decide what is important
to emphasize here. This reference here will provide you additional data if
you have to do that. In summary, the availability of LCI data has made the
realization of LCA's substantially easier and
cheaper and enable you as a practitioner to focus on your foreground system
where you have direct data. Whereas for all the rest, you can usually rely
on background data. Consistency between
background data is really key and
very important. When using a conveyed that data, I recognize if you energy
is about burned or our heat from all just the
kilogram physical units. To be sure you have been
modeling the process properly. I finish with Direct
LCI data collection is hard work, but we need it. Usually it's okay to do it for one or two processes
that we can. This is our privilege
in some respect. In our time of data rich that we've never seen so many
data available nowadays.