Let's look at these
inventory results and perform important two
sensitivity study. You will see we can do it from two different perspectives. First results we find
back are reserved for the steel resolve
14043 and with CO_2, we have 233.9, and now we have the
results for the composite, the virgin aluminum, and
the recycled aluminum. The highest of the
scenario is in red here, and the lowest is in green. What is the best scenario? Can we decide at this stage without even doing an
impact assessment? Look at these numbers a bit. We see that we have
a lot of reds in the steel and a lot of green
in the recycled aluminum. Likely, the steel will be the worst and the
recycled aluminum the best. We know this is the case for
energy, that's for sure. But overall, we still
have some exception. The main exception, for example, is here for lead, Pb. We see that in fact the
scenario which is emitting the most and that's
probably linked to the recycling of the aluminum. He's is here this recycled
aluminum scenario. Now, if lead, even small
amounts of lead can have a huge impact,
we know that. So if lead would be dominating
over all the impacts, we couldn't really be sure. We're not sure that
the steel is the worst and the recycled
aluminum, the best. Recycled aluminum could be the best if lead is a
dominant impact. We really need to complement these results by an impact
assessment to really look at the result and
the robustness, and the trade-offs between our
different impacts. Eventually, we have more higher inventory flows with the steel lower with the recycled
aluminum, and in the middle, it changes according to
the different flows. We will have to look between the composite and the virgin
aluminum that we have here. Now, a big uncertainty was how long do we drive this car? We assume 200,000 kilometer, which is not necessarily match my own prayers presently
we are a 140,000 miles which is already passed the 230,000 kilometer
about that. With that, I hope to drive
it until 200,000 miles, which will be more than
300,000 kilometer. This is pretty uncertain. One way to look at that is to do a sensitivity study with
the primary energy. We need to graph per inventory flow separate graph for CO_2, for example, as a function of the transportation
distance here. We can look, and let's
do it for the steel. If you remember a few minutes ago, we have been looking here that the steel at manufacturing, just after the manufacturing, we needed 584 mega-joule to manufacture this steel front and panel that we have here. Then we drive. We can say here, this is the use phase and we
were going to 4,002 here. We have another two mega-joule. You have another two mega-joule. We don't really see it. It's so small in for
the landfill here. Here we had our 3,456 plus
the last two mega-joule, which are for the landfill,
which make our total. We can re-distinguish with that. I like these cumulative
graph where we can put manufacturing here, then we have what increases with the transportation
distance. It could be also with
a number of use. You could have that which as
a number of use increases, you increase your total
energy in that case. Now, we can compare the
scenarios and what do you see, you see that the steel scenario is worse than the
aluminum scenario. At zero, the aluminum requires most and more energy
around 850 mega-joule. That's from 20,000-25,000
kilometer here, we have the aluminum
becoming better, and compared to the composite, the aluminum become better
around 50,000 kilometer here. The recycled aluminum is
always better in that case. We can do this representation, we can do also another
representation. This is to take the slope. We calculate what are the mega-joule per
kilometer driven. In the cumulative one, this was the cumulative
perspective, it's only increasing with time. Now, if I take the
mega-joule per kilometer, this is the slope. Here, the slope is
in fact infinite. As I'm increasing, my
slope per kilometer is going down, is decreasing here. We can represent the mega-joule
per kilometer driven as a function of the
distance that we have. This is what we have and
we see this decrease. If we go with the recycled
aluminum at zero, we would be infinite, and now we come down as we increase our
transportation distance. Basically, the manufacturing is divided by more kilometer. In the end, we are
reaching ranking, which is based mostly on
the use phase when we go to 200,000 kilometer. Again, we will
find that we cross the two scenario at about 25,000 and here around the 50,000 that we had in that case for when one
scenario becomes better. The two representation now, this is a more complex
in fact representation. I personally prefer the
cumulative representation, which is easier to
understand in our case. In summary, the inventory can be determined by matrix
multiplications. It's a way to structure a lot of number in an elegant way. This is what is
used, for example, in SimaPro, all the
different software. In our case here, we were
based not on the unit process, but the aggregated flows. We were providing the inventory
of all aggregated flow from cradle to gate or cradle to grave in
the case of our car. These aggregated flow are the cumulative extraction and emission per functional
units that we have. This is the initial step
for product comparison, but is rarely conclusive
as we saw with the lead, so without performing
the impact assessments. We basically need an
impact assessment if we want to go beyond a prior. This sensitivity
study is interesting, especially from some of the most uncertain
usage parameter like the product lifetime, the total distance
over a lifetime, or the number of reuse
that we can have, or the number of books
read with the Kindle, or this number where there
is no a true answer, but the results
vary depending on the number of these
lifespan or reuse. Doing a sensitivity studies
is an efficient way to analyze trade-off and enables a practitioner to discuss minimum product lifeline for
a scenario to become best. As we say, there's
a break-even point where express here with
25,000 or 50,000 kilometer, and so avoid to make arbitrary assumption that
this car will drive so much. We don't know when we build it, or how long it will be driven.