Let's shortly discuss the differences the main life-cycle
inventory database. The largest database is mostly used is
Ecoinvent database. We have spoken of
it quite a bit. Developed by different
research institutions from the Swiss government. The European platform on life-cycle assessment
has developed a product environmental
footprint which is really interesting. You access most of the data of these via the Life
Cycle Initiative website we've just looked at. In terms of the US. US has not long tradition of
inventory process LCA data, but has a long tradition of economic base data
input output data. I will shortly introduce you, what it is about. We have data for 400 sector and this is also accessible
within Simapro. You can access, it's
usually under the name of the C database that you need to upload when you upload
your different database. This is an interesting one to upload and have it
in your database. Now you have also a
whole series of sector specific database and that includes the
Agrifootprint database, which is also in Simapro. The Agribalyse that you
also have in Simapro all via the GLAD network and the World Food Database
from the company you created Quantis
which you can. In fact, is now incorporated
mostly in Ecoinvent itself or accessible
via the EU platform. Finally, in the LCA you
have the LCA commons, which is a nice
datasets developed by USDA here and the
National Library. The problem is it's
relatively difficult to do an entire LCA on these
LCA commons because the data are not always complete
and you have to be very careful that you don't have missing processes when
you use these data, but they can be nice to incorporate in a sense
within another database. Other main developer of data, country are Japan,
China is coming, which is nice to have first
dataset from China, Korea, and Australia, which also important data
producer, I would say. Let's now go a bit more in detail in the
Ecoinvent database. It's the broadest unit
process database worldwide, has energy system
material and building, chemical metals, transport,
packaging, waste treatment, agriculture, and quite a
few electronics product that I really need to
have like a laptop, a printer, screen, flat, or different types of screen. It's the latter
that you have here. For each of the process, you will get 400 inventory
flow time, 4,000 processes. This is a lot of
data to analyze, but it's really precious because that gives
you the basis and the background processes
for many of your data. Two things I want to
say on this databases. First, it's good
because the people who have created it are
hyper systematic. It's a bit of a
question of culture. They are here, Swiss, German, super detailed,
super systematic, able to what I call "Answer the call for
data" like a monk, nearly where you are able to study a process
during a long time. Get all the data from
the literature or from online data and check what is there in the team
would have loved that. They would always have
one institute who was responsible for a set
of data, for example, for energy system or material building and to
other people, at least, from other institutes checking the quality of the
data so it was check, check, check and really
high-quality data. In fact, the early
database started in 1996 on energy system, environment the database
became in early 2000s, the Ecoinvent come
and we are now the third version
of this database. I trust in fact, data via people I
know are systematic. I know them personally
or [inaudible] who developed that earlier
is good friend. I can trust what he's doing in term of the quality
of what is that. I was part of this
Ecoinvent center in the bulge coming from the [inaudible] on the French-speaking
part of Switzerland. My main contribution,
it was not on data. My main contribution is
I forced them to write in English because they were documenting
things in German. I said no way
you do it in English. Your database is the most
important in the world. You need every process to
be documented and you have three folders of about
a foot of paper, which is now also
of course in PDF, which is available to support
and document the data. That's really a
great initiative. How did they develop it.
It was very interesting. The people first did
some energy system under the guidance of a professor that in fact I had
in my own studies. They did that and
from there onwards, they made a joint venture
with the Swiss EPA. The EPA was smart because instead of trying to finance
everything themselves, they contacted the Swiss office for material and building, the Swiss office
for transportation, the Swiss office
for agriculture. Each of these offices, like USDA for agriculture but the equivalent for Switzerland, finance, a part of the database. As a whole, it costed, the first run was probably
about three million dollars. That's probably another three million or even more which
have been invested in the meantime to develop all these data and we
can access it for, I think, $1,500 or
something like that, this order of magnitude. But you have access to
it through Simapro here. Through the software
that we will be using. Ecoinvent database provide
all flows at two level, at the units process level and then direct emission
and extraction. Plus you get in fact the
intermediary flow when you have the unit process level. Intermediary are really
only for unit process. Whereas instead of
the U for UP level, you also have
systems level flows which are aggregated
inventory emissions. I would say that if you
are using and developing, adapting a process unit, process level is really neat. If you need to adapt it. If you're just
using it, in fact, is much easier to visualize afterwards if
you directly use the aggregated because
behind it you will have thousands of processes this is sometimes hard to visualize. If you have no change, I would recommend
that you apply that. Especially because in the
version we have excess, we cannot do the
uncertainty analysis directly where the
uncertainty you need your UP level here. Many other database only provide aggregated flows in that case.