Let's dig in a bit further to look not only at
the existence of the data, but their formats and
how you can interpret, understand them, read them. In particular, we want to have that in the SimaPro software so that when we will
exercise with it, once we've done now
our hand calculation and our case-study
presentation are done, we want to be able
to access these. Let's look at the data
format and data acquisition. As we have just seen, we could have this
unit process level with direct intermediary data, which is the first step in arriving to aggregated
data or after identifying the amount
of each unit process when I build my process tree, calculate the elementary flow per functional unit
for each process, and getting your
aggregated inventory. Once you have your aggregate
inventory at the system level, you can look at both. Let's look first, here are these direct
intermediary and elementary flow. We take the same
process we are used to, aluminum primary liquid. We have basically two groups. We have the input from the technosphere,
from the economy. That input from technosphere, which is one group of processes. We have all the elementary
flow which are emissions. Mostly here, these
are emission to air plus a heat waste here. The third category are
disposal processes. These are disposal
type of processes. Where do we find them
when we look in SimaPro? First things in SimaPro, when you look at the process, this is my aluminum
liquids, ecoinvent. So you have aluminum primary
liquid at plant here, and you have one kilo, which is the amount you
can choose your unit, you can choose your amount,
which is the output. This is what the service
delivered as the product at the gate of my
aluminum industry. You here have known
input from nature. These are the directory
resource extraction and as we have direct, they are known because the
direct will happen in mining and this is not this process of the aluminum industry itself. We've seen all these disposal
intermediary processes, including our aluminum oxide, if you remember, at plant where we had about 1.9, here you have 1.92 kilogram per functional unit per kilo
of aluminum that we have. We have all the
different processes from our process tree that we find back all the
processes we had here. The group, they appear
on the left-hand side, they appear here under the
intermediary processes. Sorry, here, this
is not disposal, this is just my input
intermediary processes. Here for input. If I look my elementary flows, the direct emission to air, we find back the
benzo(a)pyrene that we had, the carbon dioxide fossil, you'll find with the
corresponding quantity that were also in here, carbon dioxide, 1.5 kilo. This is exactly what
we are finding here. Finally, we have the disposal
intermediary process which are appearing here. One beauty of ecoinvent is it's results are provided
with an uncertainty range. Its uncertainty is based
on quality indices, pedigrees called the pen, one will look at the
technology of the data. For example, either at the
geographical matching with the data you have, and depending on the quality, you give a grade from 1-5, and based on that,
you calculate. Here, let's go for the
particular smaller than 2.5, you have this factor 3. It means that for a
factor of three here, this geometric standard
deviation of three mean that 95 percent
confidence interval is a value divided by 3. The 95 percent CI
will go from 0.00261 divided by 3 to 3 times
0.00261 that we have here. So that gives us an uncertainty, which is we need to have. Second type of data, which was at the end of our
process to aggregate it, we get only elementary flow. You will have input here
from the environment, resource extraction, and all the outputs to the
environment as emission here, mostly emission to air. Here, no intermediary
flow because this has been accounted for
getting my supply chain. But now we only look what is crossing our boundary
to the environment. Let's look natural gas in ground 525 cubic decimeter. You get all for one kilo. Now aggregated flow, you get
a lot of resource extraction from the environment which was
not existing in the direct because that was not
happening in my process, aluminum primary, but it's
happening in the supply chain. You see here these in ground, this is extraction from the
ground that we have here. Now, the emission side, you have this aggregated
emission to air, which here are by
alphabetical order, and you find carbon
dioxide fossil, for example, you have
in different area. For carbon dioxide it's
irrelevant if the population, but you get here
like 2.84 plus 4.66, 7.4 plus another 1.8 kilogram. So, about nine kilo
carbon dioxide emitted, in that case.