How can we calculate a full
life cycle inventory? The best things to do to do that, it is to take a practical example and
let's take a car example. Okay, have my small Ferrari here. The car was not necessarily a Ferrari but
it's a nice car. And we will look at the matrix
based inventory calculation how we can structure things
elegantly in that case. So we elaborate a full inventory for
a simple case study. We then illustrate the determination of
inventory flow based on aggregated results from databases. And third we perform a sensitive study
on key uncertain use stage parameter. Typically in that case
we will look at total distance driven by the car
over its lifetime. So let's take as an example a passive
piece in a car which is behind here, the front and
it's called the front-end panel. And this piece is designed to
hold the lights of the car, the radiator, it has really
a holding goal if you like that, we can hold all these different pieces. So the function is transport over
car lifetime over 200,000 km. And I remind you that when we have
a component of an overall product which is my car, we will always refer
to the function of the car overall function which is transportation
over the entire distance. The functional unit will be one
front-end panel of equivalent rigidity, which means different quantity depending
on the different material used. And we will test three material,
steel, plastic, SMC, thermoplastic and
condominium and recycle aluminum. So, and we have for 200,000 km service. Let's look if we use our
usual form to do that, we see that for
this functional unit of one front-end panel of equivalent rigidity
over the lifespan of my car. The distance driven. With steel
I have 10 kilo steel needed. This 10 kilo steel, okay,
will create I will have 10 kilo
steel which are driven over 200,000 kilometers and
it's a number from Volvo here. For each additional kilo
in the car we assume additional consumption
of 0.00004 liter per kilo-kilometer times is
200,000 times 10. We get here 80 liter consumption
just to transport this front-end panel over the lifespan and
the 200,000 km driven. The SMC is 7 kilos, so
this is proportional. And instead here of 10, I would have 7 and
that gives me 56 instead of 80 liter and the aluminum, I need 5.9 kg aluminum for
the manufacturing. But for the final weight of my piece
of aluminum is 3.8 kilogram so which is less than half of my 80 liter. I get 30.4 liter for these 3.8 kg that are transported by my car
with this front-end panel. System boundary, classic,
I don't want to go in detail but we excluded here the infrastructure to
make the car and so we remain relatively simple with the raw material, the
manufacturing use, and waste treatment. Eventually recycling because the aluminum recycle has a much lower
energy use than normal. Let's get what are the main
intermediary flow. If I do my product system, I'll have for each scenario
five or six number here, the steel is the amount of steel needed. Then the electricity.
This is for manufacturing oil. The heat for manufacturing my use phase
of gasoline and a landfill, the 10 kg. And and we'll do that for
each of the different scenario. Now, once we know the quantity used,
if you remember, we need to multiply that by
the total emission per kilo steel, per kilo composed, per kilo virgin
aluminum or per kilo recycle aluminum. And these are these data
that we have here and we structure it and put in here
the different emissions and resource consumption on the rules. And each column corresponds to
a different material, the steel. We've seen 24.7 mega joule energy and 1.28 kg C02 emitted per kilo steel. Okay. And we repeat that for
each of the scenario. What is interesting is to see we have
162 here kilo aluminum mega joule, primary energy per kilo, aluminum. So that will be higher than for the steel. And with the composite material, we also have a higher energy
with 80 mega joule per kilo. Even if it's lighter,
we might finish with higher energy need at the start,
after the manufacturing phase. See the interest of recycled aluminum, only 21.8 mega joule per
kilogram against this 162 here. The electricity we've
the European electricity with 10.5 and
low level emission of resource use of 0.2 mega joule per kilo
land filled in that case. Okay, so
now let's combine these two things. On the one hand, the amount
the intermediary flow, if you like of each of the product time the aggregated
emission for each from the database. And we structure that
in matrix calculation. So this is the same matrix we call the
aggregated matrix of the emission E and energy which has here one row is for
energy. That is the row for CO2 that we
have here under different emission. And then I have a demand
vector y which is composed of here we are calculating for
the steel scenario. This is our steel scenario. Okay, we'll have 10 kg steel 19.7,
2.38 liter gasoline and 10 kilo landfill. Total we see is 4,043. How do we get that? And how can we get the contribution of
each of these components to the total. Matrix calculation,
you've done that probably a while ago. Either high school or
first year of undergrad. And let's recap,
how do we do a matrix circulation. We take first the energy let's calculate we have here 24.7 mega
joule per kilo steel. 24.7 times 10 kg steel time 10. Okay, so that will be 200 and that was 247 mega joule
per functional unit, okay. The 10 kg here are kilo
steel per functional unit. And these ones are here
mega joule per kilo steel. And so we had a kilo per a functional
unit time mega joule per kilo. We get mega functional unit for
all these different flow. So first column, first row here,
second column 10.5 electricity time 10.5 mega
joules per kilowatt hour time, 19.7 kilowatt hour of electricity. So I can write down again 10.5 time 19.7. This is equal to 207 Mega joule per functional unit. Okay. And now we continue. Let's take a triangle
here to differentiate 56.9 time 2.3, 56.9 times 2.3. This is equal to 230.9. Okay. And now I have the gasoline. This is the use phase that you have
the 43.2 time the 80 liter gasoline. This will be 43.2 time 80 liter. This is a total of 3456. And then the final one is 0.21
here time 10 kg landfill. So this is 2.1 mega joule per
functional unit for the landfill. Okay so this is for my landfill. Okay and sum of that is equal to my
4043 mega joule per functional unit. And I can restart. The second row will give
me the calculation for the C02 if I would repeat it. Now what is interesting
is, what is dominant here? Okay so clearly in our case the dominant
contribution is the use phase. But it's important that we can get what is
the energy after the manufacturing phase. So that will be the sum of the energy for
the steel. The 247 plus 207 plus 130.9. Okay this is a total if I take this number together I get 584 mega joule per functional unit. So this is my manufacturing
energy that we have here. Plus 3456 for the transport, the use phase, and 2.1 for the landfill. Will play now with that looking
at the different results.