Good. So now let's look at one of this unit
process as it comes out of a database, and we have here the ecoinvent
life cycle inventory database which is the mostly
used database in the world. Develop in Switzerland, in fact,
I was in the board of this database when I was faculty at
the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology. It has been a joint
venture between different institute who was
developing this database. I will come back and
give you some more history on that. But this database is
interesting because it gives you a very detailed view of
what a given process like here aluminum primary liquid, and
we want to produce one kg. This is not really a functional unit, strictly speaking because this aluminum
will be then used in a given product. But this is typical of
a cradle to gate life cycle inventory where we
produce a certain material as output. And you see that there will be on the one
hand a lot of different inputs and a lot of different outputs. Let's do a small exercise and I suggest
you stop the video for one minute. Look at each of these
flow of the unit process, aluminum primary liquid and
decide which of these is intermediary flow which is coming from
other economical processes. Or leading to other economic processes and which of these are direct
extraction from the environment or emmission of pollutants to the environment
which are the elementary fuel. So mark them for example in blue and
in green in that case. So if we look at the results that we have,
we see that in the case of aluminum, primary liquid, all the inputs are in
fact intermediary flows in that case. Many input flow are in fact
intermediary in many cases unless you have in front of you mining process
which is re extracting from the ground. The exception might be water. We have quite a few process
where we are taking water and using it directly inside our process,
okay? And on the output on the other hand, this is where we have a lot of elementary
flows, and we will set them aside. And I say for keep them for
the inventory, this one and these are a mission like benzyo(a)pyrene
which is one of the pH. Other pH you have here, carbon dioxide
fossil and then carbon monoxide. Different nitrogen oxide or sulfur
dioxide which lead to particulate and direct emission of primary
particulate here and flow that we will follow a bit and go in further detail in the inventory
which is the heat waste. We see that, but for now,
as I say, we park that information, and we will news now the information on
the intermediary flow and for the outputs. Any flow sent to disposal any amount
of materials sent to disposal, disposal itself is still
part of the economy. So this flow is in blue and is an intermediary not
an elementary flow in in that. So basically what we're saying is that
the disposal is part of our system here. And if if we look more generically
than this particular process will have in our system the mining of
rural resources and transformation. We will have some infrastructure
the plant and transportation in any LCA. Of course the manufacturing phase
which lead to our use phase. And in the end either
the disposal waste treatment or if we can we can reuse our product or
if we cannot reuse it we might be able to recycle part of it and
use it as an input to another. Manufacturing perhaps for
the same product or different product. So waste disposal and treatment
are included in the system boundary and our intermediary not elementary flow. The level of detail
required to achieve this. Okay. Is depending on your goals or finish
you can be very refined and I've seen LCA or flooring material
with 1000 different process or you can have process
grouping things together. And this is really up to
the person developing the LCA to define that. What what makes sense for
the type of product? We we we have here perhaps
one precision on the eco- invent database that I want
to emphasize is on the input side only flows which
are mentioned as ores or in grounds are elementary flow. All the other from ecoinvents are in
blue they are intermediary flows. Okay so good so now let's let's build and
for a given product function. The system is best built by designing
a process tree of flow chart or flow diagram that we have, and
that's what we are learning in our part B of this chapter, taking
the aluminum liquid as a detailed example.