So let's see what are the steps and
how we can apply them to the aluminum
example to build this tree? The idea is first,
we start from the functional unit and we put that as a box, as a process. Then we take the blue flows, the intermediary flows
from this unit process and we build our Tier 1 flows
that we have here, okay? And this will group all
the flow that are needed, for example, if we take a functional unit
here of 1 kg aluminum liquid, okay? We'll have here some aluminum oxide,
some anodes we look at in a minute. And then we follow up and we say,
this Tier 1 processes, what do they need? And they need themselves some other
material which are entering in their production. And we find that via following
the intermediary flow. So we start from a functional unit,
we take the Tier 1, we follow upstream and downstream
of the Tier 1, we repeat this step until you reach processes which
are covered by an LCA database. So if here I have a process which is well
covered, I can stop because people have already done the work for the upstream and
I don't need to repeat that, okay? So you are in fact in a better position
than when I started LCA in 1991, where we had very, very few databases and data from packaging or
mostly on the energy side. But you now have more
than 4000 processes and processes like laptops and electronics. You have a whole diversity of chemical, which set you in a much better place
to perform much quicker than LCA, and in fact, much more accurately
than we had in the past. So once we have traced all that, we
redesign our processor tree, we do that. And then we will give for
each box, we want a number of each box which will be, for
example, here will x and we will calculate it based
on this different flow, which would be, for example,
here, the kilo box site, okay? Per kilo aluminum,
per functional unit, okay? So in each box, you will have either
the kilo or if it's different unit, you could have per functional
unit that you want to give, and you don't give the unit, you give an
individual number like x in that box and y in that one for each box. Let's see how we do that with the example
of the aluminum primary liquid. So we want 1 kilo out of our
aluminum plant producing that. And first, we identify the first
tier of reference flow. So we see that we have
here aluminum oxide, which will be one of the flow,
we'll study it. And remember we have here 1.93 kilo
aluminum oxide per aluminum primer. But we also have an anode and cathode,
some plant electricity mix the heat, the natural gas,
heat from natural gas and some transport from a transoceanic freight
plus two disposal processes. We can put a box for each of them. And we see we have a transport
oceanic freight and don't forget to put the disposal
which are part of my system. And all these boxes here
which are downstream from my aluminum primary liquid. This is a disposal of the process, the disposal as it's
a credit to gate LCA heat, the disposal of the aluminum itself will
come later in the life cycle in this case. And let's look particularly
at the aluminum oxide. So if I put the the box here, I'm using 1.93 kilo per functional unit. If I put here 1 kilo as a functional unit, that's what I'm using,
and I keep record of that. This was Tier 1,
these are all the Tier 1 processes, okay? And now let's look at Tier 2,
how do we do? We take aluminum oxide from the database. We look at the intermediary flow and
we repeat the operation, okay? So aluminum oxide is using
aluminum hydroxide, okay? And basically,
you follow a process flow which indicate how a product is manufactured and what are all the different
sub-products which are used here. So 1.53 aluminum hydroxide plus,
I also have the same electricity, heat and additional amount which which
come in addition to what we have. Emission here our only heat waste
in that case, which is rare, usually you have more emission than that. But as we say, when we build our system,
we forget about that, we will come back when doing
our inventory for this flow. So now aluminum oxide,
I have now the aluminum hydroxide which now
are the Tier 2 processes, okay? Which are here marked in brown,
and you see that some of the processes like the heat,
light fuel oil, all the transport oceanic are both in
fact, Tier 1 and Tier 2 processes. Because they contribute
directly as direct here, input to the aluminum primary liquid for
here. And they also indirectly contribute via
the aluminum hydroxide which contribute to the aluminum oxide, which contribute
to the aluminum primary liquid. So in the end, the amount of transport
will sum up these different amounts, okay? So now how we repeat,
we have got of Tier 2 and Tier 3 level. How can we populate
the amount in each box? So we said here, this is easy,
this is 1.93 kilo oxide per functional unit because
that was the direct flow. How much do we put in that box? We know we needed 1.93 kg aluminum
oxide per kilo aluminum liquid. If we multiply that by 1.53 kg aluminum
hydroxide per kilo aluminum oxide, you see that in terms of units,
the kilo aluminum oxide are disappearing, and I will get kilo aluminum
hydroxide per kilo aluminum liquid. This is the amount per functional unit. And here 1.93 times 1.53, that's 2.96 and you get your 2.96 here, kilo aluminum hydroxide per functional
unit that you can do here, okay? And we can continue that because if
we repeat this step at level three, we found the amount here. But in addition to that,
we have the level three tier where we are introducing the aluminum hydroxide
itself has the bauxite at mine and 1.4 kilo bauxite at mine which
is used in my aluminum hydroxide. Plus again, some electricity,
some heat, and some transport which are producing here
and some red mud from bauxite digestion. So this adds now the Tier 3
level that we have here, okay? Which are also entering inside my system. So now we use this an intermediary
flow to fill in the box. And that's what we did here 1.93, we had multiply here
these two to get 2.96. And here for the next level, how do we do? We have 1.93, 1.33, 2.96, and you look at the unit now it's kilo
aluminum hydroxide per functional unit. And now, we have 2.965 time 1.4, if you repeat the operation, which give us the 4.14 kilo bauxite. This time, the kilo aluminum hydroxide
are getting away, if we look here, kilo bauxite per functional
unit per kilo aluminum liquids, all this number here we're putting
are already per functional unit here. And we repeat that for the anode for
the petrol, the light fuel oil and the transport, which will be a combination
of what is coming from here and directly from the aluminum here, okay? So we get all out here like that stepwise. And in the end, we have a nice design
process tree with in each box. And that's really the condition when
I ask you to do the process tree, I want to see the amount per
functional unit in each box here filled with the amount here of process
used per functional unit. This is really key in what we want to do. Okay, in summary,
a product system description includes the unit processes
which are part of my system, the intermediary product flows. And we would say we park and
keep the elementary flow from each of these unit process from into
the environment, okay?. In addition, we have the product
function which is delivered and crisscrossing the system
boundary to the economy. Whereas the elementary flow
are crossing the boundary from and to the environment in that case. The process tree is built starting from
the reference flow, what was purchased to obtain the product function, and moving
through the different tiers of processes. And the process tree is documented
using intermediary flows to calculate the total amount of
each process per functional unit, which is key that we will use
later in the next phase LCA phase, which is the inventory in that case here.