Where shall we stop? When we speak of
system boundaries, should we include if we take
our example of popcorn, the machine who
manufactured the popcorn? What about the machine
who made the machine and the machine who made
the machine who made the machine who
manufactured popcorn? We don't have infinite time, we need to stop somewhere
in our assessment, so where to stop consistently and how to fix
these system boundaries. Our learning objective is to define consistent
system boundaries based on the product service and the function, and
more specifically, identify potential biases
in system boundary, determine rule for
good practice, and check whether
under which condition common processes to
different scenario can be excluded from
these boundaries. Let's take a counterexample. In the early 1990s, consultants worked for a very well-known international
fast food chain of restaurants and they compare a fast food with a
conventional restaurant. Basically, the consultant arrive with his results
and publishes, in fact, it was disclosed inside
the fast-food restaurant that the fast food requires
six time less energy, seven time less water, and surprisingly, five
times less waste. The last point was the most surprising from
my point of view. Looking at these results, we were starting investigating, but why do we get these results? Why is really the
question for science? When we don't understand
when we're surprised, we never let it go, we
always ask why, why, why, until we understand
and either we learn something new or
there was a problem. In this study, there was indeed some problems. It was a restaurant, so they had taken the boundary, the walls of my restaurant
as system boundary, and choosing geographical
rather than functional boundary does not necessarily
cover the same reality. We see that when we have here the different step
of food preparation, which are considered in the fast-food restaurant and in a conventional restaurant. If you take the wall
of the restaurant, what happens inside the
wall of the two here, the fast foods, and on the right, the
conventional restaurant. First, the preparation
of food and cooking is included in the
conventional restaurant, but this is excluded in my fast-food restaurant
because it's pre-prepared burger or
salad which are ready. The final cooking
is in both cases, but in addition to the cleaning, heating of the
restaurant itself, and the restaurant is
not really the same, there is not so much table
in a fast-food restaurant, here we have to also deal
with reusable dishes. We don't have here dishes, but we have packaging
and the packaging waste here can be not necessarily collected
inside my restaurant, so they might be
excluded, and secondly, the manufactured
of the packaging was not happening
in the restaurants, so it's also excluded. If we come back, the function of the fast food, in addition, is different because we have people in a conventional
restaurant will sit, will take time to speak whereas, in fast food, you don't offer
these secondary function. To compare rather the fast food, we should compare it with
another fast food for which we have reusable dishes
versus the takeaway. Now, about the waste, what is the difference
on the waste between the fast foods and the
conventional restaurant? First, the main waste stream in a normal
restaurant, what is it? It's the green waste, it's preparing my food. I have here losses, I have some bones
that are excluded and this compostable waste
are the main part, whereas it's packaging in
the case of the fast food. So very different waste, so taking just the
quantity as such doesn't qualify for an impact base
footprint of comparison. We need to account from which type of waste,
and in addition, as we said, the packaging
is not necessarily considered in my
fast-food restaurant. The preparation and the energy when preparing the burgers, salad, and all that, was also dis-considered in the fast food and not
in the conventional. Let's look at the system
boundary now for a proper study. Colleague from the ETH Zurich, the Switzerland
Institute of Technology, the Swiss MIT in Zurich, redid the same study, this time, according and
considering dishes, packaging, the food preparation, the dishwashing,
heating, lighting, and the waste treatment
equally in both scenarios. They were including what was happening in the pre-preparation of the food as well as what was happening within
the restaurant. Here the system boundary were counting for the same reality. Second, they compared
another fast food, one with reusable, this one is with reusable
dishes versus here, the takeaway fast food. They recounted also the
number of customer, in fact, the fast food customer
were overestimated or they hadn't taken really an average day in
the first study. We see that, in practice, the reusable dishes
was leading to a lower impact and one reason for it was a
reduction of transportation, the other reason was the reduction in the
secondary packaging, which is not completely
surprising in our case.