Based on that, if we
want to avoid this bias, what are the rule for good practice in setting
our system boundary? The general rule is include all the necessary processes to assure the desired function, you want to have everything
which is necessary included. Second, the system
boundary should cover the same
functional reality, not geographical, not
company boundary, or business boundary, why? Because business boundary
will depend on what is outsourced to other company
versus what is produced, and when you compare
two companies, you cannot take the
whole of the company, you need to take the
functional reality, which is including the
whole supply chain of your company in both cases. Functional reality. Second, only processes
contributing to more than a certain
percentage are retained, or said as otherwise, you need to ensure that
all processes contributing to more than a certain
percentage are included. This percentage depend
on the level of detail of the study,
and why that? Because one of the
first study I made or I peer-reviewed in fact, was a study on flooring
from a Swedish company, and this flooring was
studied very much in detail with a thousand
different unit processes. That means that if you
would put a one percent, for example, cutoff and you
have such a level of detail, you are really in trouble if you start cutting everything
off or leaving out, which is all the processes
which are lower than a percent because you would
leave most processes. If we have, on the other hand, about 10 different
processes considered, one percent would be
goods as the basis because things
which contribute to lesser percent are small
compared to the other which, on average, would be of 5-20
or 30 percent as a whole. This cut-off really
depends on your own study. Second thing, the
cut-off criteria is really a minimum
inclusion requirement. We could formulate it as
we want to be sure that these processes are
included and are retained. Third rule is, when do we have identical processes in
a production system? Exactly the same processes, perhaps we could exclude between two scenario because we
have it in scenario 1, we have it in scenario 2, and if you're interested, one versus two, these
two things are equal. We could say, "I don't
need to study that, I know they are the same, I can disregard them." Let's look when we
can disregard them. We are saying that we can do it only if the intermediary flow affected by these processes
are strictly equal. Let's take an
example to do that, and I'll take the example
of my toothpaste. We'll compare three different
types of toothpaste. We have here self-standing
tube compared to packaged tube that you receive inside a cardboard altogether, and a dosing tube where you could take your
toothbrush and push it here and you would have
the exact amount of toothpaste which is
coming on the top. When we compare
different packaging, I'm just interested in the packaging of
toothpaste, question, can we exclude the
toothpaste itself? Haydock in 1995, they made this comparison with our
three different packaging that we have here. The normal package where the tube is inside
another package, a self-standing tube, and the dosing tube. You see the self-standing
tube had the advantage to have lower packaging because you didn't need the
cardboard to do that. Can we exclude them? You see the three
toothpastes had exactly the same
amount of toothpaste, the three tube, so
can we exclude them? The answer is no
because when you look the wasted toothpaste
is not the same. The self-standing tube
they have is certainly the case with that brand but the self-standing
tube they had, had more waste in one
case than the other tube. Even if the amounts inside
was the same, in fact, to provide the same amount
to brush your teeth for one mouth well brushed or one
set of teeth well brushed, you will need in fact a bit
more every time because when you cannot empty your self-standing tube
as well as the other. Now, question is, if you are a designer
and you would like to make toothpaste environmentally friendlier with my packaging,
what could you do? What would be the
simplest things to do to make it environmental
friendlier? Think a minute about it. My proposal is for
what's a problem? You see here the toothpaste has a dominant impact here
compared to the packaging. The toothpaste is more important than my packaging itself. Now, have you ever seen advertisements for
different toothpaste? Usually, when they fill it,
they feel it like that. Have you ever tried to
put that in your mouth? I will not try now because
I would have bubbles coming out of my
ears if I do that. In fact, the main thing is if we could regulate exactly the
amount of toothpaste we're putting in our mouth
that would be really convenient and probably
where we could gain by adjusting that. To do that would be simple. Just reduce the size of the diameter of the
opening of that tube. That would be much easier to put exactly the same quantity that you want and not this
large quantity here. Why companies are doing that? Because here it's not a win-win situation for
them because if you start being able to regulate
exactly how much you put, you will put probably less and they will sell less
toothpaste in that case. But that's a good example of
where we need to move out of the model where you always try to sell as much as you can in
terms of consumption. You have that now with
the powder where we have this smaller quantity of powder which is compressed, and where you don't waste too much and they found
a solution to still sell this dishwasher
powder or washing machine powder which are
more efficient in that case, without losing money
which is key of course, for the business
side of the problem. Let's finish with
the last example. We're comparing two
herbicides here. We're comparing a
first herbicide I would say all traditional
where you need to apply 10 kilogram
per hectare versus a more modern
pesticide with only 0.2 kilogram per hectare,
and this reduces. You need to have more run
with your tractor here, so it reduces your tractor. What about the
plowing of my field? This is strictly equal
operation is the same tractor, the same field which
will be plowed and require the same amount
of diesel in both cases. Could we exclude it
in our case because it's the same between
scenario when I am interested in
comparing the herbicide? Answer is no. Because even if the two
processes are the same, you see, the yield here was different between
my two herbicides. I have here 4,000
kilogram yield against the five tons here
per hectare with herbicide A which was
apparently more efficient. In that case, that means that my 20 liter diesel even if
they're identical here, when they are divided by 5, I get four liter diesel per
functional unit or per ton, whereas 20-liter
diesel divided by 4 I get here 5 liter
of diesel per ton. In that case even if I'm
studying just the herbicide, I need to consider every things
which have been affected by my herbicide which is
indirectly via the yield, the amount produced per
functional unit difference. We need to be careful basically when we exclude
processes to be sure we have exactly the same intermediary flows
in both cases. To summarize, the system
boundary must cover the same functional
reality in all scenario. We have cut-off criteria for the inclusion of process that we need to
clearly describe them, we need to give what is the
cut-off percentage for which all scenario need to be
included inside my boundary. This cut-off
criteria is fixed in advance when you put
your goal and scope definition before
you go and produce the inventory of emission
or resource use. The percentage could be a
percentage on the impact, percentage on the emission, or percentage on the
resource use and energy use depending
on the study. Processes that are identical in different scenario can only be excluded if the
intermediary flow affected are strictly equal. Same quantity of each
process is required per functional unit of
the different scenario. Even if sometime you can exclude them because they are the same and the intermediary
flow are the same, you might still have a rough estimate to
be able to compare these processes
which are common to both scenario to those who
are different in this study.