Now that we have built our product system,
how can we study the flow which are crossing the system
boundary from the environment and to the environment and make
the inventory of these different flows. So this is the second phase of an LCA. Which look after the goal and
scope definition. Look at the inventory of extractions and
emission and and we are really interested to to
see when we compare scenario per functional unit, what we abstain there. So the learning objective in
building this life cycle inventory are to quantify the direct elementary
flow of each unit process, combine each unit process,
intermediary and elementary flow to obtain
aggregated inventory flows. And then we want a clear differentiation
that we understand if it's a direct flow or an aggregated flow per
functional unit which is accounting for the entire supply chain. In this second case,
let's start with a few definitions by definition the inventory of
elementary flow Is the list and amount of all the floor which
are crossing the system boundary from the environment for
the resources and to the environment for the emissions. So this is our green arrows
that we have here and we really have a list of at
least 400 substances depending on the database that are crossing
this boundary per functional unit. And this is what we aim
because we are aiming with LCA at the environmental impact. So that's what we want to assess. Let's take an example
of shoe manufacturing. Okay. And we want when we
determine the elementary for shoe manufacturing to take not only
the direct emission to air but also we know that for shoe manufacturing
we need, for example some rubber, we need some leather and we need some
electricity for the manufacturing. This is a tier one, tier two. We need a farm because leather
comes from comes from a cow and you need to grow your cow and
that means you need fertilizer. And so
we have the the the entire process and emission can occure at each of this
unit process that we have here. So if we want the total
aggregated of all the C02 emissions, we need to move up and
down the process tree and obtain all these emissions, but
we want them per functional unit. Okay.
That so that we can sum them consistently here. So it means taking into account of C02 emission not only during
shoe manufacturing, but during all these different processes
that we have in the process tree.