How do we do that? We want to use a
step-wise procedure. This step-wise procedure
works as follow, and we're going to illustrate
it with a case of aluminum. This is an aluminum tube which was used in fact
for Delta plane. When I did my first internship
nearly 40 years ago and when the person doing
that had some extra one. I'm using them for
volleyball poles, but they are extremely rigid, very light and this is the basic material
for transportation, especially air transportation, everything in a plane is made
either of light aluminum or very light plastic in certain
fibers in certain cases. Very interesting materials. What are the impacts
and the emission for one-kilo aluminum
liquid that we produce? Let's take the example
of heat waste. It's an emission of heat and emission of megajoule
to the environment, waste heat to the environment. First, we need to find
the direct emission and extraction factors
of each process per kilo for each process. The megajoule heat waste
per kilo aluminum liquid, but also the megajoule
heat rate for example, for the kilo aluminum hydroxide that we had when we
built our system. Second, we have
already identified the intermediary flow
per functional unit when we were building the process system so
we know how to do that, we don't need to redo again. But we have this kilo aluminum hydroxide
per functional unit, which was 2.96 kilo
per functional unit. Now, we multiply basically the kilo aluminum hydroxide
per functional units times megajoule heat waste per
kilo aluminum hydroxide and the kilo aluminum
hydroxide go away and you get your inventory flow
per functional unit. This is what we want in megajoule heat waste
per functional unit, so all the flow. Then we sum them, we do the sum of it and the sum will give me my total
inventory flow. I can know what is the
contribution of each of these unit processes to the
total that we are obtaining. Let's do that for the
aluminum primary liquid. Direct emission
of heat is large, is 56 megajoule
per kilo aluminum because in the electrolysis, which is done to get my
aluminum primary liquid, I'm consuming a lot
of electricity. We have 15-kilowatt-hour
electricity which is consumed here. This electricity
becomes all heat. We have 3.6 megajoule per kilowatt-hour that
gave us the amount of 56 megajoule per kilo
aluminum plus a few from the heat server
that we have here. But we have also all
these intermediary flows. Either the disposal side or which means I need to account
for the supply chain. This is just what's happening in the final manufacturing
of my aluminum here that I need to go now and collect data in the
entire supply chain. We have designed
our process system and we know the quantity
now which is used. For example, we had these 2.96, which was the combination
of the amount of aluminum oxide per functional unit per
kilo aluminum time, the amount aluminum hydroxide
per kilo aluminum oxide. We have all these data and now we will multiply this
data by what we need to find first and it's
really the first step now for our different
processes of the supply chain is to get now the direct emission of
each unit processes. For example, for
aluminum hydroxide, we have 0.503
megajoule heat waste per kilo aluminum hydroxide. How do you get these data? They can be found first in
databases because we want to be efficient or we are lazy. I'm not sure I'm lazy, but I love efficiency
so if I can find data, this is much quicker. You can find it from
the literature. For a given product, you might have people
who have done a study, not necessarily put
it in a database. But that could help you or a similar product which
will help you along. Some website, but you
have to peer-review the quality in that case and
if you don't find anything, you make a direct
data collection and this is by a
questionnaire with the company who are producing it or direct measurements here. When you collect it, you collect usually all the flow for
unit process altogether, either from the literature or from measurement or databases, so that you get both
the elementary and the intermediary
flow together so that you can even
perform a mass balance. Once you have that we see here we've collected
for each of the process, in addition to the 56 megajoules direct I have here the 0.5, and this is here
megajoule heat waste per kilo aluminum hydroxide. I have a little per
kilo aluminum oxide. I have a bit more
megajoule heat waste per kilo and all, etc. I do it for each of the process. We have determined now the amount here per
functional unit of each of these process and we
have now the amount of heat. We can basically multiply the intermediary flow by the elementary flow
per unit process. Here it's megajoule
heat waste per kilo aluminum hydroxide
and when I do that, I get rid of the kilo
aluminum hydroxide and I obtain 2.96 times
0.5 is nearly 1.5 or 1.49 and that will be megajoule heat per
kilo aluminum liquid, which is our
functional unit here. Per functional unit, it's a cradle to gate. This is the output of the aluminum liquid
industry, which is here. I can repeat that for
each of the process. I repeated 0.449 time 1.4, 57.7 time 0.049 and I get a certain amount
per functional unit. It's all reported to the
aluminum primary liquids. But I have the contribution from each different processes here, then I find my 1.49 megajoule heat waste
per kilo aluminum. When I do that, then next step, we sum it up and we want the total for my aluminum
primary liquid will be the sum of all these
megajoule heat waste per functional unit and
that's what you get here. Fifty six, this is a
direct 0.07 is small the aluminum oxide and you can identify what are the
big contribution. You can see that after the direct contribution of
my electrolyzer is here, I have the truck transportation, then the electricity mix, and the transoceanic freight, and then comes the
aluminum hydroxide, for example, in our case. You sum them up and you
arrive here to 66.6 megajoule heat waste
functional unit here that we are obtaining. Now we can repeat that not only with the
megajoule heat waste, but with each of the
different flows. The arsenic, the benzo[a]pyrene, which is PAHs, and of course, some carbon dioxide,
fossil carbon monoxide. I repeat that, accounting
for the entire supply chain. This is now my
aggregated inventory for my one-kilo aluminum
primary liquids at plants. Question, among these which one we should
color in green as elementary flow and which one we should color in blue
as intermediary? Think a bit and look at these
flows. You can pause even. First hint when you look
at what is entering, you see that you have in ground. All these are in ground, so they are really apart
from the occupation forest, but which is also directly from the occupation of the land. But these are therefore
elementary flow. They are taken from the environment and
on the emission side, you see these are all
different type of emission. We don't have anymore
disposal process because the intermediary was used to calculate the
elementary per functional unit, but then we don't
need to have it. In fact by definition, we sum only elementary flows. All these flows are
elementary on both sides. When we look, of course, at an aggregated inventory,
which is higher, we have 66.6, whereas the
direct emission were only 56. The 10 additional
megajoule or 10.6, are coming from the anti, supply chain and this is valid. It will vary according
to each flow, depending what is the
dominant process.