The best way to interpret and to learn how
to interpret is to take a real case study and exercise
our judgment analysis. As a case study, we'll laptop versus desktop. This is a 2000 about laptop. The study we'll carry on, is the study I used, in fact to apply for my
professorship in 1998. Then we will update it with more recent data
based on ecoinvent. Learning objectives are to apply the interpretation principle to a computer case study comparing
a desktop versus laptop. Doing that, we want to
identify components, life-cycle stage, material and recycling strategy of
special interests. We will look at these
different angle we were mentioning earlier. We want to identify
which substances also are dominating
human health impacts. For the second stage, interpret results from SimaPro and ecoinvent across
impact categories. We would like to do this also accounting for
informal recycling, which will be the last
part of this presentation. PC case study description. Our objective is to develop a sustainable or environmentally
friendly computer or to compare different computer from a manufacturing
perspective. We do the life
cycle assessment of the desktop versus the laptop for five-years during 2,000
hours and as initial data, as they say are from 1998, interesting to see how
it improves with time. Function of a PC is multiple. Probably nowadays, which
was not the case in '90s, is access to Internet, social media, but also writing, calculating crucial
for our class, and more broadly,
the analysis of information or the
sharing of information. Functional unit. This is 1PC used
during 10,000 hours. Look this was in '98
to 200 megahertz PC, where nowadays we are
at four gigahertz. We multiply the speed of PC by a factor of 20 or even
30 if we consider this. Reference flow, we buy one desktop that's
assuming to be equal to the lifetime of analysis
and at the time it was a CRT, cathodic ray tube screen. Laptop is a PC including
an LCD screen, and key factor, parameter, of course, the lifetime
of my computer and the consumption during use. Let's look a bit at the
system boundary classical, we will in fact, the criteria here chosen
was all the processes with larger than 2 percent
emission and resources. In term of resources, we have the material
to do the PC. For example, here, 0.5 kilo aluminum function unit
manufacturing process, the use phase was important. The electricity consumption
for our desktop here of 20,880 kilowatt hour, and we want, of course, the waste treatment
to be included in our system boundaries. Emission inventory. Always we want to check
our emission inventory. You can see the weight
of the desktop, which is substantially
larger than the typical weight of like four kilogram at
that time for a laptop. In fact, every flows
here are higher for the desktop computer
by basically a factor of 2-3 when we look
at the different emission. What was relatively
surprising to me was to see that even for lead, the emission where heavy metals, the emission were higher with desktop and we have to say '98, the impacts of the battery
are not really considered. That's the question we will have when we move to ecoinvent, is how important are the emission associated
with the battery? As a curiosity, you can see that a computer is emitting
close to one ton CO_2. I mean 860 kilo CO_2 emission, or 30 times higher than
the mass of the PC, so this requires quite a bit of energy and greenhouse
gas emissions. We then had run the climate
change score of the desktop, and it's always interesting to identify what are the
dominant substances. We see very clearly CO_2
was 860 plus 1.9 CH_4. Even with here we were
using in with impact 2,000 to a GWP100 of 500 years. That's impacted others
to make a choice. We made the choice to say we
want the long-term effect. We know CO_2 proportional, CH_4 has short-term effects, which are high up to 34
for the first 100 years. But when you wait long enough, you go down to between
six and 11 here. Even with 34, we would
be totally dominated, in fact by the CO_2 itself, which is the dominant
substance here. What is interesting is now let's compare not only the CO2, but the energy, the
greenhouse effect, the human health damage, and the ecosystem damage. For all of them, very
similar behavior. We have the laptop
at about 40 percent. We see this is the
way it's taught to be interesting to look at
the different components. In the desktop we really have the screen and the tower itself. You see that large fraction of the impact in
all impact category is associated with
the monitor and in particular with its
energy consumption. Now, interesting to look
is for each of these, is it rather the use phase or the manufacturing
which is dominating? Let's look at that. You see that for the desktop, the 160 Watts electricity
use represent about three quarter of the total primary
energy consumption. In fact, also greenhouse gases, which are close to that. The production is
one-fourth of that. The laptop has basically
reduce the use phase, to a limited amount, whereas the production is
remained about the same. Even if the mass is less the components here are
relatively energy-intensive. The laptop is dominated
by production, but not because
production increased, but because the use
phase has decreased. Why has the use phase decreased? Why couldn't we have
a desktop which is consuming less? Think about it. Very clearly the
laptop, in fact, is optimized for
energy consumption. Not so much to reduce energy, but for having an
extended battery life that you can use it over
the maximum of time. All components in my laptop are optimized and it's
an important feature that they consume less, whereas for desktop,
people don't care. That's a pity in a sense
because that's how we get electronic equipment which are consuming substantial
amount of energy. The use phase reduce for the laptop to increase
battery lifetime has substantial reduction in impact compared to the desktop. Now it's interesting
to go deeper and say, which of the sub-components
between materials, the electronic themselves
what is the repartition in primary energy here
for the two computers? If we look at our desktop, here, for the desktop,
the production of material here in green, which is here, is still substantial and we
have a big CRT, has a lot of glass. Of course, there are
some electric components and assemblies is a small part. In contrast, the electronic
component is really the dominant contribution for
the monitor of my laptop, which is the LCD screen. It's an electric
component in itself. Now the PCB, the
printed circuit board, is an interesting feature
because for this one, none in fact nor the
electronic component, nor the material, are important
that it sees the assembly which really here produce
a large contributor. When we start understanding
this contribution, we can start answering
the question, which are the components
whereas recycling? First things, is
it interesting to recycle where you have a lot
of energy for the assembly? Not really because
when you rebuild it, you will have this energy. Certainly this is not
a priority there. Now, what is interesting
is when you have the production of material which represent an
important fraction, which is essentially here
for my desktop monitor, this is thought to be a high
potential for recycling. Now, why are we speaking so
much about e-waste recycling? Why would it be important? In a sense, two reason, we are interested to
recycle two kinds of components and materials. Those who have a high
value and have like precious metals that we have in the components
that's a first-class. That's a main reason for e-waste recycling
is avoiding toxics. Having a high toxicity is really the second criteria
for recycling. It's very interesting to
see, generally speaking, material which are
relatively low value, not too much toxicity. You've better to incinerate or landfill them
and use them for energy production or
just landfill them. But either highly valued or highly toxics should
have the same treatment. They should need to be recycled and recycled in the proper way.