Now let's move and
have more up to date results from eco invent who in
version two added the full analysis of laptop, desktop, printers. So we have we have quite a few electronic
component there in a convent and that that's highly interesting. Let's look at this process
tree of a desktop and and we look at from a global warming
potential perspective a climate change. Okay functional unit is still
1PC used during 10,000 hours and first look at the desktop computer. So if we look here, we have in
fact here the electricity side and here we have the manufacturing site and the size of the arrows is
proportional to the flow. So we see that we have at least
two third on the electric side and about one third here on the manufacturing
which is confirmed what we had in 1998. And if we enlarge the screen, you see that that three electricity
low voltage production and that is all the electricity
production chain here on the left. And on the right, it's really
the CRT screen is important and the manufacturing of the computers
are about equally important in that case, with the printed wide bringing important
contribution inside the total here. Okay, so now let's look at the laptop and
we see for the laptop,
we see a reverse effect where about 60% of the carbon footprint is coming
from the manufacturing and 40% from the electricity production side. So let's look again,
if we enlarge a bit this this picture, we see what is contributing to the laptop. So the left is again electricity
production, nothing new. Okay, but the the amount has
just been reduced on this side, you start finding okay,
the printed wiring boards to the right. Okay, and you have the LCD module
which is an important contribution and now interestingly the battery
is appearing as an important contributing here also on the left. But the PCB,
the printed circuit wiring board is, I would say the first
component in there and there is some magnesium alloy
which are used here which also play a role in terms
of material in this case. Let's now look not only
at carbon footprints, we still have our carbon here
at the global warming but now we extend it and
we have somewhat similar picture for the different human health here
categories which are here. And then for the ecosystem impact we
try until here global warming and the two energy and mineral here and we see one exception,
this is the ozone layer depletion. That's a limitation when you have
a mid point impact assessment that it's very likely that the laptop
is performing better. But on this category which
are link to CFC mission it was. So the question is, how important
is this category versus the other? And this is the role of our damage
assessment where we will now put that in perspective looking at
Dali's which make it comparable. But first,
we can check with different methods, we always say,
we want test alternative LCA method and we see CML was the mostly used method
in the early 2000 until perhaps 2010. And again, we see ozone depletion
the other about the same. The laptop being about a third of the of
the desktop TRACI, the USCP method, very similar picture and
the ozone depletion being there. So if like this main conclusion arose. So let's look now at
the damage assessment and these are the normalized damage. So that would be here. Some person functional unit. Okay, and
who say normalize damage assessment? We cannot combine human health and the
human health impact category of this one. This is the different human health
category, ecosystem quality categories where I see the contribution to
the normalized damage is lower. In fact that's surprising for I mean, the impact of a personal computer which
are more electricity and human health. The climate change which is an impact 2000
kept separate and to not driven energy and mineral extraction which is also based
the energy to extract these minerals. So if we look separately,
first, my also layer depletion which was the only category which had
conflicting result here is negligible. Okay, that that's the beauty of
the damage to put in perspective versus the fine particulate
what we call the respiratory in organics here which have
a dominant impact on human health. Not that surprisingly, in fact, for
both in that case, that's really both computer in that case because
system quality we have some terrestrial [INAUDIBLE] which might be linked to
the land filling of some of the elements. And global warming, we find something which is really
linked to the energy used in this case. Okay, so I put here best representation
because I really like here that you have, in Singapore you take a small which
is a per impact category option. And this gives us the separation. We can then sum up here on human health, here on ecosystem quality and
that's what we are obtaining here. And of course, the ranking is the same and instill the normalized damage
aggregated per category. But I really prefer that we interpret
the result with this representation where we can see the contribution of
each midpoint category to the total. Okay, now what substances are and and component are contributing
also to the human toxicity and the human health health effect? So if we take the desktop computer,
we see here this time on human toxicity
the contribution of the building, the manufacturing of my PC
are about higher than before. We were at one third, we are at about 40%. And if we are increasing a bit
the size of this picture, we see that we have the desktop is
becoming a bit bit important here and also the printed wiring board force for the CRT screen are relevant in this case. If we take the laptop,
then we are in a one third electricity, two third manufacturing. And if we are enlarging
what matters most here for the manufacturing,
electricity is always the same here. So we see that the batteries
start to be important here with 0.0779 equivalent
of the battery that we have by functional unit and
the printed wiring board for the laptop here are really
the high contributor in this case. Okay, now we can look not
only at which components are contributing to
carcinogenic damages but we look the carcinogen from
impact 2002 and TRACI. And we look what was
the substance contributing most. So here the highest is hydrocarbon to air. Okay, which we don't really find and it's probably not simply not
available as such in TRACI, but we have a lot of overlap between the two
approaches of what is contributing. So the arsenic to air,
which is the highest here is also a contribution here for air. The arsenic to water is here
as the second contributor chromium to air is also appearing
arsenic to soil is also appearing. So we have I mean a relatively
good cordons but some differences. I mean like the lead to
water which is different. I say the hydrocarbon to air. Benzoate. Perrin is also in both
lists that we have here. And really on the top side,
this sort of differences between the hydrocarbon and,
and the arsenic. They are within one order of magnitude. So we should really
think in log scale here. So these are really equivalent. So the use of these methods are really
to select what are the 10 or 15 substances which matter most. And we see that several of them are in
fact common to the different method, which is relatively good news in our case. This is now the human health damage. So what come in addition to the cancer and
cancer are here. The fine particulate, okay, so
primary particulate here but also the secondary
particulate from Nox and Sox which are admitted and
which in impact 2002 are dominating. Whereas at that time CML didn't have that. So we, we find back the arsenic and the
same as we had with the casino gen, simply not because they just missing some of the
effect of find particular in that metal. So it's important we understand,
okay, what is missing when, when we look at the floor, it's always
in semi pro interesting to say what has not been considered by the method,
which might be problematic. Okay,