Last part here is so
far we've looked at computer which were in the in the developing country would
be partly recycled at the end of life. What's happening when e waste is rather
brought in an informal e waste recycling. So we're just publishing
presently a study on analysis in collaboration
with my colleague dr rick Neitzel and
Obre who made a PhD on that. We look at recycling in the informal
sector and in in fact in Thailand, okay? And the first things when you do you
want to study recycling mass balance. I'm a physicist, I love to be sure that
we're not underestimating some masses. So we we really need to say,
okay, when we are dismantling our television in the Thai community
who is specialized in doing that. We start from an average of 21 kilo, okay? And this is the 100% that we will have and
now people are recuperating, you see the copper,
copper is just about 1%. They are recuperating some steel here,
10% from my TV, they're recuperating plastic,
17% of the weight. The screen is heavy, 64%,
they just selling the screen as such, they're not doing it themselves. The wires are 1.1% but have quite
a bit of copper which is interesting. And the printed circuit board
which are nearly 5% of the total. The cathode ray tube, the CRT tube is about 2% with also some
precious metal which are interesting. What is very interesting
is what is put to landfill in fact in the community is only 8%, okay? So in fact it means
the the recovery efficiency here in this community
is super high with 92%. And that's interesting
because in develop and OECD country we tend to be
much more wasteful than that. What we put in landfill are much
higher quantity of material, in contrast here where the economy try
to be parsimonious and recuperate that. So in fact the informal in terms
of efficiency is really good for at least sorting dismantling things, it's heavy labor to do that, but that's a good strategy in that case. So now we took this mass balance and
then we looked at different aspects. We look at the recovered mass, the income
financially and the environmental impact. Let's look in detail what's going on here. Recovered mass, you see the large mass in
gray here is the steel that we have here. The second largest mass for
the washing machine in particular, refrigerator, on our tv is
the plastic that we have here, okay? And this is the plastic
that we in that case. And then we have our CRT glass which is directly here which is an important mass. And the copper as we were saying,
not that important in terms of mass. That when we move to the income,
you see the copper and there are two here which are important,
it's copper from cable, recuperated copper from cable and the
copper itself from the motor I think that. They represent more
than half of the income in any of these scenario
that we have here. Okay, so
they are really interesting to recuperate, I mean, money-wise,
we look at the environment in a second. Money-wise, the steel for
the refrigerator is also important. Okay, and we have still a bit for
the washing machine and the plastic here is relevant for
the income. Now, what is the economic
performance of this community? You can see this is the initial
in blue mass or price okay? So in that case they pay this amount and when they resell all
our different material, they will get about 30% margin. And this margin will be
used to pay the worker or pay the family who
are doing that as a family. And they are about,
when we were calculating the revenue, they are the minimum salary in Thailand,
which is not much but not that bad. And that really confirmed we have
the right order of magnitude of prices and everything because in a sense, the price, initial price will just adapt
in fact to enable enough margin. But the people selling
the recuperated tv and refrigerator before being dismantled,
they want also to make the maximum profit. But they must leave some profit
to the one who are dismantling. We saw that the recovered mass compared to
initial mass we've nearly recovered 100%, that's good news, environmental impact. Let's move at the four graph to the right,
we have here the human health in Dali's. Climate change impact,
global warming, resources, which is basically energy and
minerals and the ecosystem quality here. We've use impact 2002
to do this evaluation. 0 is here, so this means this is
above 0 impact is detrimental. Here we have a bonus,
why do we have a bonus because we are recuperating raw material which are substituting by
allocation virgin material. So this is beneficial
when it's below the 0. So let's look at the main
contribution in terms of benefits. We can see that the PCB,
this is a printing circuit board, that's really an important contribution. Again, the copper and partly the plastic
might be here important contributors. Now, the detrimental side,
what do we have? We have that the cables which are here, this is my whole cable which is here. My whole cable here and here are creating substantial emission
because they burn it okay? They will burn the cable to get rid of the
plastic burning that you create dioxin, so you create human health
impact which are important. The second human health impact is
associated with the CRT glass here. This is this part and this is linked to
the lead which is at the back of my CRT, which if it's not properly
handled is a problem. By the way, in a sense, if you don't
have the informal recycling, this part will be also admitted into my landfill if
I landfill it as such without dismantling. So this is not really a detrimental
effect, but the wiring are because if they would be put to landfill,
they would not have so many emissions. In term of the climate
change we see really bonus, we don't have this high toxicity effect. And all the recycling is
bringing a net here, if you like, positive contribution or
more substituted than than emitted. Same story for the resource site. And here the plastic start to
contribute in an important way in these different category,
providing you indeed, recycled plastic. Which was the case at that time,
I don't know now the market has changed dramatically with china
changing their practice. So we see an efficient recuperation but problematic when we go to the really
processing of the recovered materials. So informal sector would be really good,
in fact, for dismantling sorting,
recovering the material themselves. And then have this transfer
to a more formal sector to do the extraction of
material in a proper way. So, in summary, for this interpretation of computer use
stage has a central importance for the desktop and this is where manufacturer
could do better, they could reduce that. And the use cases reduced for
the laptop and manufacturing start to
be really important. Process tree is an efficient way
to identify the dominant process. You can use that yourself for
your case study in semi pro. Relatively good convergence in
our case between LCIA method. Two converging motivation from very
different points of departure but arriving to the same conclusion for
very good, very valuable and very bad,
very toxic components. Then both of them,
it's interesting to either to recover the valuable component and
avoid toxic impact of electronic components in land fill and
also in the informal sector. What is interesting is that sort of life
cycle based, mass balance based approach can be applied or not only to the formal
but also to informal recycling sector, which has a high efficiently for
dismantling-sorting. That is problematic when you go to
burn some, for example of the cable.