we have seen with the popcorn example,
that function is a crucial part of LCA. LCA is all about function and how can we avoid the same problem and
make mistake. How can we provide good rule to
define this function well and the basis for
the comparison in a reasonable way. This is our learning objective for today. So define function and
functional unit as a basis for consistent comparison of products and
services. We will select the functional unit for
multiple type of application to reflect the product function and
service offered to its user. We will then determine the reference
flow as what is needed to be purchased per functional unit to be
purchased to ensure this function. And third, we will qualitatively
identify key environmental factors that are essential to product performance. And can be already used very
early in the design stage of a product to improve and
optimize our product. So let's look, we've seen with our
popcorn versus polystyrene example. That LCA relates the environmental
impact to a product function. So products and system can only be compared on
the basis of a similar function. And we want to ask ourselves
every time we do a new LCA study, are there differences in the secondary
function between the scenario, that we would need to account for? Okay, so,
let's take a slightly different example, and I'll take here the example
of an incandescent bulb, okay. And this bulb, we want to
discuss what is its function and then what are secondly other performances. So function of a bulb,
this is pretty straightforward. It's to illuminate our room or
where we stay or outside, but let's assume it's indoor and
we want to illuminate indoor. Now, depending on the alternative you
look at, I mean the fluorescent bulb that you could have here, or LED that you could
have here at stake as an alternative. The fluorescent light bulb, they could
have different secondary performance. Most of them want to eliminate that,
they produce different amounts of heat. The other function of security
ambience can be different. The fluorescent can have some time,
a whiter type of life. And the style,
I mean is it aesthetic, this one? Often we put it inside the bulb to
make it a bit nicer, in that case. By the way the secondary function of heat
is that positive and negative, okay. To bring heat,
I mean our goal is to eliminate but if in addition I bring heat,
is it positive? Of course it depends because,
if you are in the winter in Michigan yes, it's positive because you avoid
from heating inside your building. But if you are in Michigan
a very warm day and you are in an air conditioned building,
then it's rather negative and will increase the amount of heat that you
need in your heating or cooling system