What do you need to
buy then to illuminate, and that's what we will
look at in the next slide? If I look and we have this template we will use
for several products here, what do I need to buy to illuminate and produce
my main function? I need electricity. This is typically a
60-watt bulb that I have here that I will need. I need a 60-watt electricity and I need some incandescent bulb, and probably I need
also a fixture because this bulb without
fixture, I cannot do much. That's what I need. Now, if I take my
incandescent bulb, what do I need? I will need this time, not 60 watts, but only
13 watts electricity. This is the beauty of
my fluorescent bulb. That was a huge difference, factor five difference nearly. I need some
fluorescent bulb and I also need a fixture
that I have here. Now, what is the other difference
between these two bulbs, beyond the consumption from 60 watts and 30 watts and
beyond the aesthetic itself? You might know that
a fluorescent bulb, if it's a good
quality one at least, its lifetime is higher
than this bulb. We realize that
we cannot compare them without considering
the lifetime. That brings us to the left here, which is our functional unit. What functional units do
we want to have here? The functional unit with
basis comparison should be related to this illuminate. What is the service provided? How do you measure light? How do you measure the intensity of light inside a building? There is a unit for that
and it's called lumen. The lumen, it's a
flow measurement, it's candela per second that are related to the number of
photons arriving per second. Typically a bulb like that
will produce 800 lumen. This 800 lumen, it's important that we
say the duration of the service because it's different if I provide
light for an hour, for a day, or for a year. Typically a light bulb will
be used 1000 hours a year, and this bulb will last one year or this bulb
will last five years. We can arbitrarily define in the functional
unit, the duration. Let's take the duration here
of five years or 5,000. It's 800 lumen, LM, during 5,000 hours, which would be about
five years equivalent. This is what we have here, 800 lumen for a duration
of 5,000 hours. What is important is
we don't need just to say it's lumen during
a certain time, the functional unit
needs to be quantified. We need to give a number. We can choose a
number because if we say 1,000 hours
instead of 5,000, our result we'll just
multiply it by five. But we need to define this
number here accurately. Now, we don't want to say incandescent bulb here
in the reference flow. In the reference
flows, which are here, we also want to quantify the corresponding
reference flow which corresponds to the amount of functional units that I have
defined here to my left. How much do we have? Sixty-watt electricity
during 5,000 hours. That will be how much? That will be? 300,000 watt hours
or in that case, 300 kilowatt hours
that I have here. Okay. By opposition, if I have 13 watt
electricity time 5,000 hour, I will get only 65
kilowatt-hour instead of the 300 that we had here and that's a substantial
reduction in my use. Now, in condenser bulb, how many bulbs do you need? People will say, I need a bulb. But if it's 5,000
hours and, typically, an incandescent bulb will
only last a single year, so I will need every
1,000 hours a new bulb. So to do that, I need five incandescent
bulb in that case. If I move here, we will need our five
incandescent bulb and in the fluorescent, the fluorescent one is
lasting the full five years, so I only need for
the fluorescent, a single bulb here. Now what about the fixture? Again, people will think, Oh, I need one fixture. But do you change fixture for
your bulb every five years? Probably a fixture will last, let's assume it lasts 30 years. It has a lifetime
of 30 years here. So I need to buy one at a time, but LCA is a construct
of the mind. In fact, for this function
here of 1,000 hours, I don t need one fixture. I will need how many? I can do 6 times 5,000 hours, so I will need 1/6
of a fixture here. In fact, for both scenario, if we assume that the bulb is not changing the
lifetime of the fixture, which is probably
the case because fixture we change
them because of design or we renovate a house
rather than being worn out. The incandescent light, in fact, might change the
lifetime of the fixture because it has substantially
more heat in that case, but let's assume it's
about equal in there too. So giving the reference flow, once we have defined the quantity of the
functional unit, is defining the quantity
that we are using here. Well, the third question is, what are the key factors that determine the different
reference flows? We can define many key factors, but I would like that we
specifically focus on the factors which
are directly linking the reference flows to
the functional unit. What are the parameters
which made this number high? So first, for the electricity, what was making the
electricity high or low? What was making such a
difference between the two bulb? Which parameter could we
used to characterize that? This is what we
call an efficiency parameter and we have
differences here in efficiency. How would we measure
the efficiency? It's basically, what
we want to obtain, which are the lumen divided in fact by the
electricity needed to produce it. So the lumen per what? Which is two power
measurements in that case, is what we'll characterize
our bulb in our case. This is one for the efficiency. Now, what about the other
parameter which are important? What about the parameter
which are determining here, these five incandescent bulb? What was it depending on? How did we calculate these five? These five was related to what? Was related to the
lifetime of my bulb. So second parameter is usable lifetime of my bulb. Interestingly, what this
lifetime is changing, is it affecting the consumption during usage or the consumption
during manufacturing? Think a minute. In fact, we see this lifetime was not changing the electricity
consumption. Doesn't matter if it
lasts short or long. This is really linked
to the efficiency. It was changing the number
of bulbs, so in fact, it affects here the
manufacturing and the material extraction stage of my LCA here, which
is interesting. So if we summarize here, the efficiency is
really important, the bulb lifespan and then
we can add as a parameter, the amount and type
of material used, which will play a role but not directly on the
reference flow. But what effect these reference flow and
what was relating the reference flow to
the functional unit is really interesting to look at.