LCA is keeping records of
a large number of flows. And there are different types of flow. And we need to structure
these thousands of flow and use them to first build
the product system and the process tree, so
how to deal with all this flow. We will learn it with
the funding learning objectives. We want to build the product system and
process tree. We want to define the product system on
a functional basis not surprisingly for LCA which is function based. We want to identify flow
intermediary between different economic process and
elementary from or to the environment. And then build this system process
tree composed of unit processes linked by these intermediary
flow between economic processes. Let's start by a few definitions. Product system is a collection
of unit processes which perform one or
more defined function. So a product system is in
fact defined by the product system here is a group of
unit processes defined by the product function that it serves. And it's characterized not
only by the final products, but really by the function
of these products. Okay, so ideally a product system
contains all the different processes that we have inside the system
that are required to achieve the function. And that means basically
that if I have included all processes here that serves
to serve this function. Okay, the input of the rest of
the economy is in fact zero because everything what is needed for
my product system is included here. We'll see in practice,
we have some exception. We don't want to work too long to that. So we'll have some rules for
good practice there. But ideally, basically, the only exchange with the rest of the
economy is the delivered product function. On the other hand, the product system as as a part of
the economy is in fact a machine or plant which is extracting
resources from the environment. And emitting, on the other hand,
residue along substances or pollutants to the environment to air,
to water, to soil or emitting noise also. We see that the environmental
here will be all marked. The flow from into the environment will
be all marking in yellow and here all the flow intermediary between different
economic processes are marked in blue. So, let's go in further detail and
look at one of these process which is basically
that the product system is disaggregated into
the series of unit process. So unit process is linked to
other unit process upstream via these intermediary flow or
flow downstream to another processes here via
another intermediary flow. So the intermediary flow are flows
that connect unit processes. The elementary flow are input
from the environment for each of these processes or
output to the environment which can occure in our system, okay? And presently we are building
the product system. So we focus mostly on intermediary flow. This is in the gold definition part. Okay, the inventory of the elementary
flow either as resources or as a mission is by definition
the quantification of all elementary flow crossing the system
boundary from and to the environment. And that will be treated
in the next chapter. So we park that and we think how
do we build our product system? So let's look at an example and
let's take a shoe example, here we have the shoe manufacturing
as our central unit process here. To build this shoe, we need some rubber. Okay that will be needed. We probably need if it's
a leather shoe some leather. Okay, and we might need some electricity
and some heat that we have here. The leather, this would be what we
call the tier one processes which are directly entering the manufacturer
of our shoe which is my main product and offering a pair of feet protected during
for example a year in the case of a shoe. So now the leather itself is
being produced by a cow and this cow is right on the farm. Okay, so we'll have another for
example, unit processes for the farm processing of the farm
production of my leather. And that will be here,
the tier two processes that will be used. And you have tier three
processes will be for example the fertilizer which
are needed by the farm at this level. So we build our products system
by moving up and down and following this and
imagery flow to build from the mainstream manufacturing the tier one first
processes then the tier two etc. Each of these processes
itself can either extract flows from the environment like for
the first fade or the natural gas from ground for
electricity. Or more commonly in fact because
the extraction from the environment is usually done by mining operation. It will nearly all these unit processes
will have some emission to the air, to the water or to the soil that we can
see such as methane for the farm C02. For many of the processes PM 2.5 for
electricity production from coal for example and dye to fresh water
directly from my shoe manufacturing. These are called as we say
elementary flow in yellow and the intermediary flow which are used
to build our system are in blue here. On each of the unit process,
you could make a mass balance and an energy balance from all the inputs. Okay, and all the output. And this is very useful to
verify that the unit process and the global system respect
the conservation of energy and mass. It's not commonly done I
would say in all LCA or LCA database, but
that's an increasing tendency that we should in fact check our
balance that the sum of inputs correspond to the sum of outputs,
to check out our balance.