Of course LCA is the best tool
because I've been working for more than 28 years on it but
it's not the only one and we need to acknowledge the other
environmental tool and does understand for
which problem is which tool suited. So let's look at these different tool and
differentiate as learning objectives, the main purpose and characteristics
of LCA and various environmental tools. And second identify the most
appropriate tools for a range of environmental problems. Different tools for different purposes so the first thing is LCA as such is
essentially an environmental tool. To study the supply chain We
have an other tool which are not necessarily environment and
which will be a compliment LCA. And these are life cycle
costing which is a sort of LCA. But focusing on the economic
aspect on the cost side and social LCA will cover the other
pillar of sustainability. So life cycle costing is
studying the economic here and but also with the supply
chain perspective and social LCA will look at like
children labor over the entire supply chain of example
shoe product in that case. But LCA itself by default
is an environmental LCA which study environmental problem. Now LCA itself and on the environmental
side can be complemented by several other quantitative tools which are addressing
different questions and problems. And these are and we'll come back and
look at them in detail, substance and mass flow analysis, risk assessment,
carbon and water footprints. In addition to quantitative
tool we have upstream of LCA. Some more general concept lifecycle
thinking being sort of generalization and qualitative LCA way of addressing problem. Eco design which is
an approach how to design new products which
are environmental friendly and industrial ecology is an approach
where you close the cycle and you use for
example the waste from one industry, you use them as the raw material for
a second industry etc. And you you try to close the different
cycles here on I would say downstream from LCA in terms of application you have
more procedure oriented methods. First environmental impact assessment
which can be partly quantitative. It's not only qualitative or
procedural but it's it's still in the frame of
legal procedure usually. Ecolabel which are qualifying certain products
according to given criteria. Environmental audit of the company
which look at the weak point of the company what is
the stage where they are? And environmental management system
which are tools to systematically include the environmental dimension
in all decision of company. So to look at this further
in further details at the environmental different tools. Let's let's look how decision is taken and
usually decisions are taken by the top management people who are well paid in
the company but they are not on their own. And first they will rely on for
the development of new product. They will rely on engineers
could be material engineer, mechanical engineer depending on
the company and what they are doing. And these people are this engineer
are are really looking at the technological system ensuring
that the product has the right performance has the right
lifetime lifespan and if a product doesn't meet the requirement
it will not be solved it it doesn't work. So it's really a key point even
before we consider the economic aspect you need to meet
a certain number of criteria. Then we can look either at
the environmental aspect and this is what we want in this class. But you could look at
life cycle costing for the economic aspect will just look a bit
at that and the social aspect with social LCA looking also at the structure
of salary and I say child labor or the training of women participate,
participation of women in the company and the question of equality which
are related also to products. But as we said LCA focus on
the environmental aspect and has this concept upstream and
procedure and really this this quantitative
assessment method are feeding for informing the different decision and
procedure. So let's look in more detail at this
six tools that we have here and let's define them a bit
in in further detail or seven tools that we have
a life cycle assessment. We've seen quantify a large
number of resource extraction and mission of substance and to estimate multiple environmental
impact associated with a given function. Substance flow analysis, quantify
the flow of environmental accumulation of a single substance usually or
a group of substance that we can have. So they focus they are they
are more narrow in that sense and and following the environment
following a certain region. This flow of given substance. Material flow analysis is basically doing the same but
with material and material can be raw material or
paper, glass, concrete, some basic material
used in the economy. Now on the quantitative also
side we have risk assessment and it studies the risk or
the probability of severe impact. And that could be an installation
like a nuclear power plant or usually with mostly used risk assessment
is for a chemical substance or eventually a group of substances that
we have and will go more in detail. Local environmental impact assessment,
assesses the negative or positive environmental consequences of and
this is the key word a new project. Prior to decision construction or
even getting the permit for constructing. And it may be governed by rules
of administrative procedures. Both in terms of the tool you
must use to decide that, but also in terms of the the actors, the stakeholders that needs to be
involved in terms of the community. Carbon footprint is a sort of mini
LCA where you, instead of looking at all the environmental impact,
you will look at the emission and impact on global warming of
the different greenhouse gas and that could be for
a product of human activity or business. Water footprint, then is also a sectorial
sort of life cycle based analysis, which we look at the impact associated
with water and as an area of concern. Because it will look at what concerns
water that could be water usage, water scarcity, we think,
but also the environmental exposure related to like
freshwater eco toxicity or human toxicity exposure through
the water media directly through water or
indirectly through fish, for example.