Look around you.
How many objects do you have in the
room around you? Each of these objects has
its own supply chain, which is generating
environmental emission in possibly the entire world. In addition, each of this
product will be disposed off and create
additional emission at the end of its life. Crucial that we understand how products are impacting
the world and we need a tool which will work on the whole life cycle of
pro-products and this is where life-cycle
assessment is useful. Today, we'll look and understand
why LCA can be used and how it can be used and what are the main stages covered by LCA. We will, as learning
objective first, list the lifecycle
stages of a product. You will be able to
express the reasons why LCA is needed and then identify some of the
main application of LCA here. If we look at the different
stages of an LCA, everything starts
first in the mining, in the extraction of
metals or energy, where we dig the earth
and take lots of earths, which has a small
amount of resources, and we have to extract and
transform these resources, concentrate them, refine the energy mean in refineries to get the raw material
that we can then use in manufacturing
and assembly here. One, we have manufactured
and assembled product. Many industry, like
a car industry is not producing most
of the components, but it's assembling these
components into a car here. Once we have that, we have to package and
distribute our products. We have the user of
our product here. This product, ones this
have been used once could be either reused, recycled, or being disposed in a landfill, or disposing an incinerator, creating emission using
resources at each of the stage of our life cycle, going from cradle to cradle
to grave or in fact, from cradle to cradle, if we recycle our
different products. Let's look at why LCA
is really needed. It's interesting in the 1990s
we were starting to work on LCA in different
labs in the world. I met with environmental
manager from Jacob Coffee. They had their own
environmental departments. He told me basically, "We have 80 percent of our environmental effort is made indoor in the
wall of my company." That only 20 percent of the environmental impact is
happening where the coffee is manufactured and 80 percent is either created of the impact is either happening upstream, for example, in
agriculture here, or downstream during
the use phase or during the waste treatments. We have this discrepancy
between where we put our environmental efforts and
where we have our impacts, which we need to solve. That's where life-cycle
assessment is enabling us to have this broad view avoiding
to just the place, pollution from one
place to another, or solve one problem
but create another one. We want to be more
integrated there. This development of LCA
has been in parallel with the way environmental has been seen in our pre-1970s. We have really whistleblowers, I mean, Silent Spring Carson, who are environmental
prophets who have the vision that we cannot
continue as we are doing here. Nowadays we see they were right. We have limits, in that case, very few regulation at
that time some concern, but not much waste it's
not so much an issue. 1973, we have an energy
crisis in the world. Price of petrol is
10 times higher in a few months and we
start to realize, we need to do more. We have in 1970s and '80s, emission control,
emission regulation, end of pipe control are coming. Usually, it's limited to an environmental
department in a company. It's not the whole company
which is aiming at that here. A time where environmental
NGOs are opposing industry largely. We have this
conflict industry. Say, we want to
continue to produce, the society needs our product, our chemical and you say no, you cannot do that. There are these also with
the nuclear industry, quite a lot of opposition there. In 1990s, it's interesting. We start here to have a
more proactive era where people start to see possibilities of synergy between
environment and economics. Instead of opposing,
we start saying we might have some
win-win situation. We have new integrated
pollution control or take back strategy, where you have
to produce or to take back the computer
to recycle them. The awareness is go all the sector and organization, and that's where
life-cycle approaches gets further deadlock here, because we need this view going through the
entire supply chain. We entered in 2000 in a more progressive way where actors start to
really collaborate. It was amazing collaboration. We see DuPont collaborating
with NGO, WWF, or even Greenpeace entering
in collaboration with industry with a goal to improve the way we are
managing our chemical, managing of emission, managing our environment
and biodiversity. Here we have integrated
product policy in particular here in
the European Union, which looks not only at what comes out of the chimney
or the industry, but look at the product
with anti perspective thus the generalization
of LCA and use of LCA. This now is integrated, I would say since
the last two years, three years, we start having
these climate action, which in especially
the young generation, has taken off in an
amazing way and change, perhaps not so much
here presently, that change radically the
way the government and the different parliaments are voting laws and progressing, at least in Europe presently. Just to give you an example, how things have changed and how now someone who has a producer, or even a bank, has now extended responsibility compared to where we were
in the last century. In 2000, we were asked
by a local bank, I was working at the
Ecole Polytechnic in Lausanne, Switzerland, and this local bank asks us to do the environmental
footprints, but also the environmental management plans of their bank. We did how much
electricity was used, we collected that, we did the carbon footprint
of the entire bank, but we also studied how
they were investing the money the different
people we're giving them, and what type of
things that were financing with this money. We gave our results to
the board of the bank, the president and all the
board members were there, and one thing we insisted on was that they were financing petroleum trade and transport, but they were not in the
management system assessing the environmental
risk involved and especially checking
the quality of life, the tanker who were
carrying the petrol there. We gave that recommendation, the internal lawyer evaluation
of our work will say, no bank has ever been sued
for financing oil transport so this is not a substantial risk and
they did not act on it. December 2002, a
26-years-old tanker sink on the shore of Spain and really 77,000 metric tons
of heavy fuel. The entire coast, we know with an oil spill, look how
messy it looks like. Unfortunately, this
local bank had finance part of this
transportation of that ship. They made the headline
of the local news. I can tell you, I jump back on my slides to look if
we had communicated clearly that they
should have done and be rigorous on that, and in fact, two months later,
the bank had left this profitable petrol
business because of the risk of image associated
with this transport. Very interesting,
limited risk, no, because we are
expecting things now from a bank that was not
expected 10 years earlier.