Now, so
lifecycle assessment in this context, in this area of producer responsibility
is used in different way. Using business strategy and R & D that
the two main usage where respondents 60%. Where for each of them it can exceed 100%
because some people are using it for several goals at the same time. It's used in product design, okay? That's an important use. Education. Is used today in education
that's what we are doing. Policy development,
the EU in particular is using quite a bit the LCA approach to adapt
their policy and development. But also in company we
have that happening. Product declaration labeling Aiso
label free level needs kind of LCA or to be accepted and recognized, certified. Sales and
procurement is not negligible but it's it's substantially lower
than in business strategy. So, what type of problem
are we addressing with LCA? It's how to decide priorities. And because the world just cannot
afford to do everything as Barlow who was the head of the International Academy
for Technical Science at that time. Was quoting and saying he had the
engineering view that the problem is not how to tackle, the problem
engineering can solve everything. But what we just cannot afford that. So, we need priority. And in many cases LCA
is there to bring and choose among the different
environmental proposals. Those who are efficient,
those who will bring the maximum benefits for
a minimum investments and improve our worlds an affordable and
efficient way. So, in summary, the main life
cycle stages of a product here, is material extraction first. Then we move to transformation
of the raw material. We have the manufacturing and assembly of
the product, packaging and distribution. Use and reuse and recycling and
finding the disposal. These are all the stage which
need to be accounted for and considered in the product.. In this proactive era,
LCA meet the needs for producer responsibility beyond
its own production sites. And we've seen that there
are multiple types of application by
multiple actors for LCA. So, now to further discover LCA, you will take the second
chapter of our book here. Download the book on on your system and take the second chapter and
just read the case study here. Where we look for
a sport event at single use paper or polyethylene cup versus
polycarbonate reusable up to 150 times. Because they are recuperated
in our scenario by the organizer of the sport event,
washed and reused over many different sport events. So, let's look what is best for
the environment. Is this single use paper cup or
is it this polycarbonate cup? And on what factor will
that depends in our case.