If we look on the transportation and
especially on remediation project. We made a study with one
of my master students. We published in 2019 with
Jacob Gasnika a study on the environmental dredging and
remediation from the Hudson River. So we compared and
that was a broad study on health, as we like to do the environmental
dredging benefits first. And this is the avoided burden
because when we dredge the river, the concentration in
PCB in the following 70 years will be reduced and
we get people fishing. In fact,
the lower river is allowed to fish, but you have restriction on
the amount you fish and the upper river on the other end is
forbidden, but some people still do it. We estimated that the dredging operation reduced here the burden of health
by a limited amount of 15 Dally. This is about one person, one death or
something of this order of magnitude. Now you have to realize the dredging
program there has costed $1.5 billion. So 15 Dally for $1.5 billion. There are other benefits in addition
to that, but it's really debatable. Could we find better alternative
which will save more life and be more profitable to
the local community rather than spending that for effort like that? Now, what is interesting was to
compare this is the benefit, but I'm bringing machine, I'm bringing
heavy equipment, I'm moving the PCB. So what would be the impact of that? We can see that in term of
local impact on the community Air PCB is really low, 210 minus 3 Dally. So the community was well protected. The heavy equipment,
which are emitting fine particulate here, that's about 0.4 Dally. So it's also limited impact,
but and there is a but, instead of bringing the sediment
at 300 kilometer or miles that they could have done. Because they were landfill,
which could receive the sludges extracted from the river full of PCB,
instead of sending that, it was cheaper because
there was a better price. In fact, and
transportation is cheap to ship them 1500 kilometer, 1500 miles to Texas. And most of the dredge
strategies went to Texas. When we calculate with an up to
date train emission in the US, the amount of tonne kilometer transported, which was huge in that case,
we have in fact 32 Dally lost disability adjusted life years lost due
to train transportation. It's not in the region mostly
it's along the whole railroad. But this is at least in the same
order of magnitude as the benefit. Now, if in addition to that,
we consider the risk to workers. The PCB, the worker were okay, the PM, this was really high quality equipment
they chose and they did a very good job with that with very low PM
emission, which is not the case for old heavy equipment, but
here that was restricted for the worker. But dredging is a very dangerous job. You are on boats, you have locks. It's a risky job. And based on the statistic long term, we could predict that there are about
14 as a Dally lost on average for a 1.5 billion work that we had here. And sadly, in fact, on the Hudson River, someone who was checking the work
got stuck in a boat which passed over one of the small cascades,
but got drawn in this guide. And that was nearly 45 Dally in this case. So on summary here the main
things was if you want to do that you should do a better job
with your transportation. The transportation of waste is really
an important point don't ship it the other side of the country when
you could put it more locally. But people locally didn't want
really sludges in a sense, since they had been polluted. So all this was due in fact,
I should have mentioned to General electric which had
produced transformers and had emitted during years
PCBs into the river. What was very interesting is on the one
hand, the dredging is debatable but preventing the source with the source
control that makes perfect sense. To avoid that what is in
the soil could reach the river at the production site and that was done. If we don't recycle, or
don't treat in a sense, when very toxic because it's
too much transportation or energy we can always for several products
which have some carbon in them and energy is to recover
energy with co-generation. Incineration but
you really have to have high quality incinerator which reject not more
waste emission than a normal heating system and
there are possibility to filter there. Also with waste and
recovering energy digesting like manure or wastewater treatment plant
sludges enabled to recuperate some of the methane also limit in fact,
the emission, which is really interesting in our case. So let's conclude. In summary, the dominant stage
of the lifecycle of a product can guide the optimization and can be
applied at the early stage of the design. Classification we've developed
here are able to identify the improvement priority minimum
weight for mobile product, maximum efficiency for the active product. Maximum useful, effective lifetime and recycling rate or for
fixed passive product or minimum transport distance for
weight disposal in our case.