Let's understand this a little bit
better by applying it to climate change. So in the LCI results we calculate
the amount of greenhouse gas emissions associated with different scenarios and this is assigned to the climate
change impact category. We calculate this midpoint damage
by using the radiative forcing that each emission causes to the atmosphere. How much is it warming the atmosphere? And then add this up because it's
all now in the same ultimate impact. And we can then convert this if we want
to end point damages to human health and ecosystem quality by indicating
how it can lead to wildfires, flooding, heat stress etcetera. And let me break that down a little bit
more into a cause effect flow diagram for climate change. We have the emissions into the atmosphere, we have the time integrated concentration
of having those emissions stick around in the atmosphere and
absorb that extra radiation. This leads to a radiative forcing
a warming of the atmosphere which causes climate change, increased temperature,
extreme weather, precipitation, droughts. And that can have effects on ecosystems
such as affecting their net primary production or effects on humans
such as flooding or malnutrition. And so, we can see that
the climate change part and rated enforcing is our midpoint level. And then the ultimate damage
to effects on humans and ecosystems is our end point level. I put this slide in here because I know
I'm throwing around a lot of terms and so we wanted to collect them all
on the slide for your reference. We have an example of LCI results or
our greenhouse gas emissions. Example of our midpoint impact
category as climate change, example of our category indicator
is our global warming potential or kilograms equivalent CO2
per kilogram emitted. The characterization model used for this example is IPCC model that
connects emissions to impacts. Our result indicator is our
kilograms equivalent CO2. We bring everything back to that. And our end point damaged categories that
we've talked about here are human health like heat stress and ecosystem qualities
such as coral impacts on coral reefs. To understand the types of modeling
that can go into this impact assessment, let's better understand this category
indicator of a global warming potential. So Global Warming Potential of
a substance i measures the increase in radiative forcing of the atmosphere
due to the emission i. Or basically,
how much radiation is it absorbing and causing the atmosphere to warm up by? And this is all measured relative
to what a kilogram of CO2 would be? So, our climate change midpoint impact
score, S here, of course depends on the mass of substance i admitted and
its Global Warming Potential. How much is it increasing
the warming of the atmosphere? And the total score is the sum of all
the different substances emitted, their mass and
their Global Warming Potential. Now, what's helpful to understand here
is this isn't necessarily simple. The Global Warming Potential has
another complicated equation with integrations that involves
the concentration of our substance i, the absorption of thermal
radiation of that molecule. The time horizon considered because
different substances have different lifetimes in the atmosphere. And let me dive just a little bit deeper
into that as you can follow me in so that we can see how the choices that
need to be made when we're comparing different things. So the magnitude of climate change impacts
depends on her time horizon considered. And the reason is that each molecule has
a different lifetime in the atmosphere. CO2 hurricanes around for 300 to 1000
years, so it's considered indefinite here. And it's short and long term impacts
by definition are 1kg equivalent CO2. But if we want to compare this to a
different scenario that results in methane emissions, methane lifetime is only
12 years in the atmosphere, but it has a higher reading
enforcing than CO2. So shorter term, it has a higher global
warming potential than CO2, 34 is its GWP. But if we wanted to look longer term
since the methane decays faster over longer timescales, it's not quite as
much greater than carbon dioxide, it only has a factor of 11. Another example to help us understand
a little better is nitrous oxide. Its lifetime is 120 years,
so a bit closer to CO2. Which means that it's shorter term impacts
of 298 aren't that much different from its longer term impacts of 297 because it
lives relatively long in the atmosphere. And I hope this helps illustrate that even
with all of our equations and modeling, there's definitely uncertainty in
these models and choices that we make that we need to make explicit so
that the results can be trusted. Now, to qualitatively understand this
uncertainty at various midpoint and end points parts in our interpretation,
we can see this figure. And this figure tells us that when
we just look at the LCI inventory, we know the emissions and
extractions relatively well. So our model uncertainty is low,
but we don't know what they mean. I can't compare a kilogram admitted of
one chemical to a kilogram admitted of another chemical without knowing
the impact that they have. So our interpretation uncertainty is
relatively high at LCI inventory stage. And we try to reduce that interpretation
uncertainty better understand the impact by connecting these
to midpoint impact categories. But in doing that, we increase our model
uncertainty because we have to add these equations and models to estimate
what impact the emissions will have. And even at the midpoint level,
we haven't yet connected it to these big categories
of human and environmental health. So if we want to go further to our
endpoint damage, that leads to greater ability to interpret, so
lower interpretation uncertainty. If I just say, this one has more human
health damage than this other one, you know a little bit
more what I mean by that. But it has greater model uncertainty and
that it depends on the time horizons considered and
it depends on how we waited things and how we combine different midpoint
impacts into our endpoint damage. So as we increase our model uncertainty,
we are increasing our relevance that leads to a balance
that LCA folks need to make. Where in the LCI inventory, we have
relatively high overall uncertainty. At the endpoint damage, we have relatively
high uncertainty due to our modeling. And so this midpoint damage is often
what a lot of LCA folks like to focus on because it's where we are minimizing
our overall uncertainty, by balancing out our model uncertainty and
our interpretation uncertainty. So to summarize what we talked about
today is how to take our LCI framework, LCIA framework and how that connects
our life cycle inventory results of emissions to air water,
soil and resource extractions. Can connect these to their
midpoint damage categories, which we've listed here including ozone
depletion, ecotoxicity, eutrophication in order to better understand
the impacts on humans and environments. And then if we want,
we can add these up and sum them up in different ways to
ultimately lead to end point damage or to human health, ecosystem quality,
natural resources, etcetera. These things that we ultimately
want to protect or value. But as we move over to the right,
we are increasing our model uncertainty. And so, we need to balance this balance
of making the results more relevant, but also knowing they're
becoming more uncertain. Thank you very much.