How to best learn a new approach is
to practice and learn by yourself. Hands on this is exactly the goal and the importance of the case
study in our class. So the learning objective for
this short presentation and the case study in general is to
practice LCA via a group case study and you will select it. You will perform and present
the results of phase one which focused on the goal definition and the hand
calculation of energy and CO2 ballance. And you will account for
the comments received of your representation to improve
your slides and deliverable. This video here is providing you
an overview of the different instruction, template, example and evaluation criteria
for this phase one of your case study. Phase one focused on
screening analysis and the intermediary leaders to
the intermediary presentation. The aim of the case study is to compare
the environmental impact of two or more products or service alternatives. And we want to identify most
influential parameters, possible improvement and the selection
will be done on proposal of participant. The first phase is on
the goal definition and the hand calculation of energy and CO2. So first you define your goal and
scope, function, functional unit, reference flow
process tree and system boundary. This lead you to fill in and submit the
function, functional unit and process tree template which is the first part of the
template that will present in a minute. Then you will perform the energy and
CO2 balance and identify the main processes
contributing to it. And you will then identify one important
and very sensitive parameter for a sensitivity study plus one parameter
to obtain for first hand data. And that will enable you
to prepare the slides and prepare the presentation slide
which is your deliverable GA1b. And finally after presentation you
have your group activity 1C which is upload updated slides which
are accounting for the received comments. Let's look very shortly
how does the template or what is needed in your presentation. Needs and objective, this is shortly
giving the context and needs, the objective of your study and
the scenario you want to compare. Be short, you want in one slide the case
that the description objective and rational. Give just enough information
on introduction so that we understand why you do that and what you're going to do then
you define the function. It's important because we want
to be sure your functional unit correspond well to the main
function of the problem. And possible define also
secondary function and performance which can be then
scenario specific in that case. You move them to the functional unit, reference flow and
key environmental parameter. And key really here is to
fix your functional unit and select a number of functional
unit that you are selecting. So for example for
the light bulb you select 800 lumen provided during 5000 hours. It could be 1000 hours. It could be 10,000 hours. This is your choice, it's a obituary the
number of functions you need to choose but you choose one and then you provide for
each reference flow. Not only electricity, but
how many kilowatt are for a functional unit which
are the number you put here? How many light bulbs do you
need per functional unit etc. And the key environmental parameter
finally our parameters which are influencing the amount you put here, which are directly linked
into your impact afterwards. And the parameter which are affecting
that like efficiency number of uses what you put here. So do provide for
each reference flow, the quantity used corresponding to
the selected functional unit and the selected amount of
functional unit that you have. Also provide one slide with what
are the main hypothesis and what data source you are using for
humane processes. Okay where do you get the data and
which transport distance you took? A number of use for example for
a bag if it's reused or not. And have this main hypothesis
clearly stated in this slide. Then we want to design the process
tree and we see in class what is the process to do that
moving upstream for each tier? What we need here and downstream to include also
the disposal that we must not forget. So this is an example here for
a light bulb and in each of the box like you want the amount of glass here
per functional unit which is here. Now in our use face box the illumination
of 800 lumen during 5000 hour for each of the box here we need 75
g aluminum per functional unit. And we need a transportation here for
example of 731 kg kilometer perfection. So each of your box must have the amount
per functional unit that you are needing. And we stop when we reach processes
available in databases like aluminum that we found in databases. So you don't need to go to
the further tier because we can use aggregated data in your database. You do that for the two scenario and
you can submit your slides here as group
activity 1a deliverable and you will get a feedback on
this first functional unit. Once you get your feedback you can move
to the second part of phase one which is performing the energy and CO2 balance and
you do that for each scenario here. For example, each scenario I've taken
an example of wall painting here to give you the template that you have received or
the example that you have received. And to do that please adapt
the excel template that I've provided in your exercise in
activity 353 on the energy and CO2 balance for the hands drying example. What you want here is to identify what are
the main processes which contributes for example in the high fashion to
the total of my energy here and of my C02 that we have here for example. Okay you want also to check
the gram CO2 mega joule. And if you get the two high
number two low number, don't let it through
corrected by yourself and find why I have something which is unusual
and look for it until you find it. This is the same for scenario B. Once you've done that you
can present the two scenario as a stacked bar graph is so
much easier to read than a table. Grouping things in for
example the processing or the material or
whatever you think is relevant but present something out to scenario
as these two stacked bar here. And you want to have both
the CO2 equivalent and the energy professional unit knowing
that they should be in most cases alike. If they're not alike, you might have
a problem and you want to check that. Then you identify one parameter
which affect your results and the ranking between scenario and
basically, which is uncertain where you don't
know exactly this parameters. So you could say okay for example
the lifetime of my paint could vary and in the lifetime of my wall
paper could vary quite a bit. So depending if it will last 30 years or just ten years my total
energy news will here for given time which has been chosen
will be reduced in that case. You have alternatively as we'll
see in class the possibility to do not hear the mega joule
per functional unit but the cumulative mega joules as
a function of the spending time. This is not really adequate for this case
study that could be useful for others. Finally, you define one
parameter you will collect and give some indication if
it will be perhaps for with a small survey on the number of
reuse people do for banks for example. Could do that with your friend or
your class or then it could be some data you look in the literature in
a relatively systematic way or possibly industry contact but
this is a bit more difficult for class. Finally, don't forget the slide for
conclusion and presenting the next step of your study and
the main point you need to sort out from what you have
identified at this first clinic. The evaluation criteria we've put here,
I always like to distribute that in advance rank and
you will get like an evaluation 1-5. That's how we will look at your
intermediate representation and we look at the appropriate background, the functional
unit and the reference to a well defined. Your process tree has intermediary flow
in each of the box per functional unit. Your energy and CO2 balance is
consistent with the process tree and you have a nice sensitive
study of energy and a relevant parameter with a clear
conclusion and next step. Professionalism in presenting and
explaining the subject and the ability to answer question
compliment what we have here. Will only put the grade in fact at the end
once you have resubmitted in GA1c, Your presentation slide, accounting for the comments that we will
make after your presentation. So to finish with some complimentary
instruction material that you have this file here is detailing
what I've presented you shortly here give you a bit more instruction. Also good practice for presenting. We have the template that is also
included in this presentation but in a easier way to use that you
can use for your intermediate representation an example
sample from a previous year. What was done by a group who
gets a good grade who did a really good job in that case and
your activity 3.3.3 Excel file to
calculate your CO2 balance. And to finish one the file from
3.3.2 where you get in fact ecoinvent data both for energy and
CO2 that you can put in that Excel file