We have looked at the different
phases of LCA in details, looking at all the data methods,
way to interpret for good practice. It's now time to wrap up everything and
summarize what are the key parameters the cree criteria for
a good practice in LCA. And let's do that in 12 minutes. The learning objective is to identify the
critical points that affect LCA results. Provide principles for good practice for
each of these influential points. Synthesize LCA strengths and limitations. We have been looking through
the lifecycle impact the LCA chapter of our course at
the four phases here of LCA, at the impact of particulate and
chemical in product on human health. And we are now doing
the synthesis before going from product to sustainable consumption, which will constitute our last chapter. It's pretty cool that we can
summarize the key points and the critical points for
good LCA practice in a single slide, okay? And this slide,
you could use it when you do a review or want to use an LCA looking
how the author have been addressing all these critical points. And this gives you a sort of checklist
to look what are the good practice for each of these points. So let's look at them. First, we recommend to perform
an LCA with a screening approach. So carry it in two steps. A first screening phase, okay, which will
take about half of the total time and where you cover the entire LCA but
look at orders of magnitude. And then you choose what
needs to be improved, refined because it's important or
brings substantial uncertainty, and you perform a detailed analysis
of these points which are important. And that's valid for
many scientific approach. Second, for the goal definition,
remember the popcorn, how the functional unit was crucial and
could completely change results. So be sure and check that the functional
unit is really representing the main function and the service of the product
and is a good representation of that. Should be metric which increases
if the functional unit doubles. For example,
the emission should also double. So it's an extensive metric which
is not a ratio, so it's not. Units are not something per
something in that case. System boundaries, third critical point
of the goal and system definition. It should cover the same
functional reality. Remember the fast food example where if
we use geographical or business boundary, this is likely not to represent the same
functional reality in all scenarios. You can exclude negligible processes and
for this you can define a cutoff where
processes can only be excluded if they contribute to less than this
cutoff percentage to the total impact. Processes that are identical
in the different scenario can potentially be excluded, but
only if the intermediary flows of these processes are strictly
equal between scenario. So if the quantity use of this process
per functional unit is exactly the same, and beware, because if the yield,
the outcome is different, the total output is different, it's likely
that this flow will also be different. Allocation between co-products,
like between wheat and stroke. What are the hierarchy recommended by ISO? First, we try to separate the process and
attribute all or some of the processes to one co-product or
the other. Could we separate them? Second, we want to consider
the possibility to do to use system expansion where
we will extend the system boundary to include a proven
substituted product. And then account for the avoided emission
of this product as a bonus to our impacts. Third, we can use physical
allocation based on mass or energy content, but
only if there is a direct causality. So don't use mass if total impact
are not directly related to mass. Finally, we can use
financial allocation nearly in every case as a comparative
allocation method or as a default allocation method when
we cannot apply the other method. And again,
we are based on causality as a measure of the incentive here for production. On the inventory sides of extraction and
emission of resources and emission, data consistency and
quality is crucial. So, beware to take the database
which are consistent, which are comprehensive,
covering all necessary inventory flows, and don't mix easily databases
unless you really need to. And check in that case that for
example electricity mix provide comparable results in
the different databases. Otherwise, you might have
real biases in your results. Third, if we move to the impact
assessment phase of the LCA, you first select LCA methods that cover
the entire cause effect chain, okay? And I would recommend in fact
to go presently to damage and use methods which go to damage by default. We need to include many information
on fate, transport, dilution, degradation, and effect like intrinsic
toxicity, soil species sensitivity. Consider and compare the contribution of
each impact category to total damages. Don't aggregate everything and
you get a final score, and you base all your interpretation
on the final score. Check that the conclusions are robust for
the main impact category which are contributing to more than
a percent to the total impact. And use several impact
assessment methods in parallel to test results robustness like
IMPACT World+ or ReCiPe that we have here. Finally, for interpretation, compare
results from different angles, okay? Look at each LCA phase, the inventory
results, the midpoint characterization results and the damage characterization
of the impact assessment, and the normalization or
weighting results that we have. Look at the contribution
of each life cycle stage, raw material extraction,
product manufacturing, production, use, waste and disposal, and
of each component of your product. And especially focus on the one
generating the largest impact or those where low cost enabled
to have efficient solution. Consider each substance, okay? Each elementary flow and
each impact category contribution. Perform a sensitivity study to
look at the significance and test the significance of
the differences between scenario and the robustness of your main conclusions. LCA, in conclusion, has really
matured tremendously in the last year. And one sign among other is
publication now in Nature on LCA of international trade
which drives biodiversity, which was from a colleague in Australia. And this paper on looking at
the rethinking of the global supply chain which was presenting to
a large republic the basis of LCA. Now to conclude and get an overview, I would recommend you to
have a look at the chapter 8 of our book on
Environmental Life Cycle Assessment, which give you LCA through
an example from A to Z. From treating urban sewage sludge, which is an interesting,
and will enable you to have a sort of recap
of the anti method. In conclusion for this chapter three,
the LCA system approach and the system character of this
approach is a strength. And provide the ability to screen and identify hotspots across
the entire product lifecycle, looking at multiple types of impacts and
analyzing multiple trade-offs. The good news is that data
availability for both inventory and impact assessment has substantially
increased and really facilitates LCA application as you did in relatively
a short time in your case study. As a system approach,
uncertainty remains high and need to be acknowledged and
accounted for when informing decision. Finally, so
far we looked one product at a time. This is useful, but this might not be
sufficient to bring us to sustainable consumption and that's why we have
a fourth chapter in this class.