How to best learn a new approach, it's to practice and learn
by yourself, hands-on. This is exactly the goal and the importance of the
case study in our class. The learning objectives for this short presentation and the case study in general is to practice LCA via a
group case study and you will select it. You will perform and present
the results of phase one, which focus on the
goal definition and the hand calculation of
energy and CO2 balance. You will account for the
comments received after your representation to improve your slides and deliverable. This video here is providing you an overview of the
different instruction, template, example, and evaluation criteria for these phase
one of your case study. Phase one focuses on
a screening analysis, and the intermediary lead us to the intermediary presentation. The aim of the case
study is to compare the environmental impact of two or more products or
service alternatives. We want to identify most
influential parameters, possible improvement
and the selection will be done on proposal
of participants. The first phase is on the goal definition and the hand calculation
of energy and CO2. First, you define your
goal and scope, function, functional unit, reference flow, process tree and system boundary. This leads you to fill in
and submit the function, function unit and
process tree template, which is the first part of the template I will
present in a minutes. Then you will perform
the energy and CO2 balance and identify the main processes
contributing to it. You will then identify one important and very
sensitive parameter for a sensitive study, plus one parameter to
obtain for firsthand data. That will enable you to prepare the slides and prepare
the presentation slide, which is your deliverable GA1b. Finally, after presentation, you have your group activity 1c, which is upload updated slides which are accounting
for the received comments. Let's look very shortly how does the template or what is
needed in your presentation? Needed objective, this is shortly giving the
context and needs, the objective of your study and the scenario you want to compare. Be short. I mean, you want in one slide the
case of the description, objective and rational give
just enough information on introduction so that we
understand why you do that, and what you're going to do. Then you define the function. This is important because
we want to be sure your functional unit
correspond well to the main function of the
problem and possible define also secondary
function and performance, which can be then scenarios
specific in that case. You move them to the
functional unit, reference flow and key
environmental parameter. The key really here is to fix your functional unit and select a number of functional unit
that you are selecting. For example, for the light bulb, you select 800 lumen
provided during 5,000 hours. It could be 1,000 hours, it could be 10,000 hours. This is your choice.
It's arbitrary the number of functions
you need to choose. But you choose one and then you provide for each
reference flow, not only electricity, but how many kilowatt-hour
for a functional unit, which has a number you put here. How many light bulbs do you need per functional unit, etc. The key environmental
parameter finally, are parameters which are influencing the
amount you put here, which are directly linked then
to your impact afterwards, and the parameter which
are affecting that. Like efficiency, number of
use is what you put here. Do provide for each
reference flow, the quantity used
corresponding to the selected functional unit and the selected amount of
functional unit that you have. Also provide one slide with
what are the main hypothesis and what data source you are using for your main processes. Where do you get the data and which transport
distance you took, or number of use? For example, for a bag
if it's reused or not, and have these main hypothesis clearly stated in this slide. Then we want to design
the process tree. We see in class, what is the process to do that moving upstream
for each tier what we need here and downstream to include also the disposal
that we must not forget. This is an example here for light bulb and in
each of the box, you want the amount of glass
here per functional unit, which is here now in
our use phase box. The illumination of 800
lumen during 5,000 hour. For each of the box here we need 75 gram aluminum per
functional unit. And we need a transportation
here, for example, a 731 kilometer
per functionality. So each of your box must have the amount proportional
unit that you are needing, and we stop when
we reach processes available in databases like aluminum that we
found in databases. You don't need to go to
the further because we can use aggregated data
in your database. You do that for the two
scenario and you can submit your slides here as
group activity 1A, deliverable and you will get a feedback on this
first functional unit. Once you get your feedback, you can move to the
second part of phase one, which is performing the
energy and CO_2 balance, and you do that for
each scenario here. For example, in scenario A, I've taken an example of wall painting here to give
you a template that you have received or the example that you have received
and to do that, please adopt the Excel
template that I've provided in your exercise. In activity, three-fifths,
three on the energy and CO_2 balance for the
hands drying example. What you want here
is to identify, what are the main processes which contribute, for example, in high fashion to the
total of my energy here and of my CO_2 that we
have here, for example, okay? You want also to check the
RAM CO_2 per Mega Joule. If you get the too high number, too low number, don't
let it through. Correct it by yourselves and
find why I have something which is unusual and look
for it until you find it. This is the same for scenario B. Once you've done that, you can present the
two scenario as a stack bar a graph is so much easier to read than a table. Grouping things in, for example, the processing or the material, or whatever you
think is relevant. But presenting our two scenario as these two stack bar here, and you want to have both the CO_2 equivalent and the energy of a
functional units, knowing that they should
be in most cases alike. If they're not alike, then you might have a problem
and you want to check that. Then you identify
one parameter which affects your results and the
ranking between scenario, and basically which is uncertain, where you don't know
exactly these parameters. So you could say,
okay, for example, the lifetime of my
pain could vary and the lifetime of my wallpaper
could vary quite a bit. So depending if it will last
30 years or just 10 years. My total energy use will here, for a given time which
has been chosen, will be reduced in that case. You have alternatively,
as we'll see in class, the possibility to do not hear the mega joule per
functional unit, but the cumulative mega joules as a function
of spending time. This is not really adequate
for this case study, but could be useful for others. Finally, you define one parameter you will collect and give some indication if it will
be perhaps force with a small survey on the number of reviews
people do for banks, for example, could do
that with your friend or your class or then could be some data you look
in the literature in a relatively systematic way, or possibly industry contact, but this is a bit more
difficult for our class. Finally, don't forget
the slide for conclusion and presenting the next
step of the study. The main point you
need to sort out from what you have identify
at this first screening. The evaluation criteria
we've put here. I always like to
distribute that in advance rank and you will get like an evaluation
one-to-five. That's how we will look at your intermediary
presentation, and we look at the
appropriate background, the functional unit
and the reference. You are well-defined. Your process tree has intermediary flow in each of
the box per functional unit, your energy and CO_2 balance is consistent with the process tree. You have a nice sensitive
study of energy on the relevant parameter with a clear conclusion. Next step. Professionalism in
presenting and explaining the subject and the ability
to answer questions, compliment what we have here. We'll only put the grade in fact, at the end once you have
re-submitted in GA 1c, your presentation
slide, accounting for the comments that we will
make after your presentation. To finish with some complimentary instruction
material that you have, this file here is detailing
what I've presented to you shortly here gives you
a bit more instruction. Also good practice
for presenting. We have the template that is also included
in this presentation, but in a easier way to use that you can use to follow your
intermediate representation. An example sample
from a previous year. What was done by a group
who get good grade, who did a really good
job in that case. Your activity per 3.3.3 Excel file to calculate your CO_2
balance and to finish one, the file from 3.3.2 where you get in fact
a co-invent data both for energy and CO_2 that you can put in that Excel file.