We have so many number in LCA. Millions of number. How can we ensure
the quality of this number. How do we? Can we estimate the uncertainty
associated with them? So learning objective is to perform
the quality control of your LCA. Is to define types and
possible sources of uncertainty and the methods to evaluate and
reduce these uncertainties. We also want you to be able to define
the minimum significant difference between two scenario depending on
which flow we are considering or which type of impact we are considering. We want to understand the steps
of an uncertainty assessment. Be able to estimate
the uncertainty on input data and also interpret the outcome of
a simple uncertainty study. So first, quality control,
this is about verifying results, verifying the consistency of results,
and looking for anything unexpected. Now, if you find something
which is surprising or when you control you have two
results who doesn't fit between your hand calculation and
your software for example. Never let it go, okay? Either you've made a mistake
which is often the case or you have the opportunity to
learn something interesting and new by understanding why this difference,
why the surprising results. So the analyst has no option but
to understand and explain any surprise or discrepancy. Second point on quality control
is being systematic, okay? Sort of German mind like that. We need to be the square. And this is the last chapter
of our book is about a study on wastewater treatment sludges,
okay? From a wastewater treatment plant. And different treatment
going from spreading in agriculture to land filling
with different paralyzes or cemetery scenario,
wet oxidation or incineration. I don't want to enter in that study. It's an interesting study if you want
to have an overview of the whole LCA, you can read this chapter. But what was very interesting, Gregory was
my collaborator at that time who did that, was very systematic. And look at the way the process
tree is shown, where for each of the scenario you have
the different dehydration module. Each module could be different possibly or
for the lining. And the disinfection of your sludges
you have some time different modules like that. But they're on the same line to show
that it's the same process steps. And this is really extremely useful and
to do that, so be systematic. We have clean spreadsheet in Excel. That's really important. And start of course by checking
your functional unit that it really represent the function and
nothing else of your system. Then we have our tool. Use the unit control basics from physics
that you must have the right units. When you multiply each of your number,
you check the number of each. You have the output unit that you wanted. To do that when you are using spreadsheet. We want a proper user spreadsheet. And the rule in my team,
sometimes my team doesn't like or has to make an effort to do it. Is never have a formula
which contains a number. If there is a number,
you create a separate cell, okay? And you enter this number
like let's say 1000 grams per kilogram as a conversion factor,
you create a separate cell and you refer to that cell this as units. You can check your units in that case. And in addition,
if you come back six months later, you know exactly why I have this factor
of 1000 or if I'm using the same number in different parts of my spreadsheets,
then you change it in one place, it will update everything and you don't
forget to change it in another place. If you would have put it inside a formula. So never never put a number in a formula. Always create a cell documented and use
always the same cell for the same number. Okay, now energy and CO2 balance is very
useful to perform by hand or in Excel and then compare it with you software,
just to check what's going on for software and
explain any difference higher than 30%. Be sure so that the combustion has
been considered during the use phase, especially if you use input output data. The use phase of the mission
are often missing. And then, when you do this energy and
see to balance your ratio of CO2 and
that's not CO2 equivalent but CO2 emission to renewable
primary energy usage is a good way to check where
overall oil product you are around 65g CO2 per megajoule and
nonrenewable. And you can start if you have
different number for that. Think about it. Is it because it's a plastic,
could be half or because we were missing the combustion. If you are around 10g CO2 per megajoule. Also, if you have big differences
in ranking between energy and global warming, you might have
in fact a problem in that case. Now, also is to display, you can check the contribution of
the most important substances. If you're surprised here
you need to understand why. Keep damaged categories separate. This is a small tick to be done in the
parent [INAUDIBLE] category in SIMAPRO. This is important that you interpret
your results accounting for orders that makes you difference and key here is to display the most
uncertain one on the log scale. Document your project file
with understandable name, reference sources, okay? Always when you use a number
put below it or side it or in a comment, the source reference
you have been using because on the spot you know very
well where it's coming from. But if someone else comes or
you take it back six months later you will not remember necessarily where it was
coming from and you want that documented. Finally, check the non-considered
emission in the software like SIMAPRO for a given impact assessment method. And sometimes they are just stupid
spelling problems which are problematic. How do you do that? You go in SIMAPRO and
after you've run your scenario you have here tab which is called check, and
here you see that with impact 2002 and I think this was a handwriting towel
scenario with the paper towel, okay? You see it here these are all the flow
which were not considered, okay? Substance not defined in Impact 2002. A lot by basically a lot of toxics. They were not considered. So look through that, and
here it's 961 substances and look that there is nothing obvious
that should have been considered because they might not consider if
you have just a comma too much or a space additional will not be recognized. And we need to check that. And long term you want
to use a method also which minimize these
different missing flow.