Now, once you've checked and you think your
results have been robust, you would still be
able to decide what is the uncertainty and is the significant difference
between scenario. This is for part B. First, considering the
different part of the LCA, here are the different
phases of my LCA. We have different type of uncertainty for each
of these phase. First uncertain time are the
uncertainty on input data, and that could be into data for the elementary of
the intermediary flows. An emission factor that we
have on the uncertainty or some model from
environmental parameters. For example, the
chemical properties have also uncertainty
in the model. Second model type, the
model uncertainty itself. Here it's more difficult
to assess that. You can have a model
which are linear, but in fact the
phenomena is non-linear. That would be a
murderer uncertainty. You could miss some
contribution here. We're trying also to
account for that. Some choices are associated
with uncertainties. For example, the choice of
the allocation methods, the choice of your
system boundaries, and the time horizons that you consider will also did
a 100 years larger than a 100 years that will play a role, and the choice
of your weighting methods. Now, variable, it's either spacial viability
or temporal variability. This is not an uncertainty
in the sense that if your model is accounting for regional difference in
environmental sensitivity, for example, or in your
characterization factor. Toxic don't have
the same effect if they have diluted a lot or not. For example, if you
account for that, then it's just
viability, and you are able to reproduce that but
if you use a simpler model, this big covenant certain. Same with temporal evaluation. Your emission factor
can change with time. New technology can
change with time. Which mean, if we don't
account for that, this become an
uncertainty and finally, we can have uncertainty associated with the
technology use. We can have different
technology and our data are not coming from
the present technology of the study we using
other as a proxy and that can create uncertainty
we have all these type, how can we assess, address, and mitigate these
different uncertainty? We have? That's nice,
a series of tools. The first tool is
the ISO standards, and the recommendation light from the life-cycle initiative. This basically first address the uncertainty due to
choices is well-defined. How you should define
your functional unit, how you should choose your allocation method or system boundary in
a systematic way. You still have some freedom. You could still
make some mistake, but it ensure basic
consistency, and that's the role of the
standard expert judgment. The advantage of expert
judgment is you're going to assess and use it for
any type of uncertainty. But it's as good as
the experts are there. I would say, with experience, we are gaining and learning quite a bit
about uncertainty. But on the other hand, we would like to compliment
it with some tool. The first tool, which is also usable nearly in every
case is sensitivity study. Make the input vary, and you
look how much the output are very you can use that for the parameter
uncertainty input parameters, but also you can test
different scenarios. Here we have the
scenario analysis, which is the variance for discrete classes from
allocation method, and on that you can study
more than uncertainty. In certain cases, you
can make regression, for example, for
bioaccumulation factor as a function of
chemical properties, you can look at the correlation
which were made, and get statistical uncertainty based on the measured value which
were used for that. Nonlinear modeling
can help reduce uncertainty because it counts
for non-linear phenomena. Spatialized model and
dynamic model enable to account for the spatial
variability and therefore reduce
uncertainty. In that case. Two methods are important
for the parameter, the input parameter uncertainty. This is to be able to know if not a single like in
the sensitivity study, but multiple parameter
vary at the same time. How much is my
output uncertainty varying with this
input parameter? And of course, in the end, we would like to be able to compare results
with measurements, which is the ultimate
way to verify a model, but it's very time-consuming. The number of star
here was representing how good is the method
for addressing this type. It's the best and the only way really to
stress model uncertainty, but in a system approach where we are looking at the impact
of a functional unit, it's really hard to verify a
per functional unit number because you cannot measure the shoe factory that you
have a single shoe going out. You need to do it for
the overall production. There you might perhaps
have direct measurements. Functional unit being a
construct of the mind, we have to be very
selective to choose cases where some time we can also
compare with measurements. Let's look at some
of these approaches. I start with the
expert judgment, and give you my 30
years expertise in LCA. What I've seen being the minimum differences between two different scenario to be considered as
significantly different. Flows like energy and CO_2, you need at least a 10
percent difference. There are flows where
data are relatively good, so small difference
is important. But if you have a two
percent difference, you can consider them as equal. Acidification, eutrophication,
fine particulate at least 30 to I would say 30-50 percent
difference for the PM. Because uncertainty
on the emission here is more substantial. For toxicity results. Here the uncertainty
is on the inventory, but also on the
characterization factor and the impact side. Here, at least you need at least a factor
of ten difference. Or if it's very different
substances and type of impact, a factor 100 to be
considered as significant. The same for damage
oriented results if you compare across
different impact category, fine particulate
with global warming, with human toxicity,
at least a factor of 10 or a 100 different to have
a significant difference. Question. Is that
relevant still, two ways to use factors and characterization
factor which have so much uncertainty? The answer, you have to realize that toxicity results between saccharine and dioxane has 12 orders of
magnitude variation. Here we are speaking to one
or two orders of magnitude. 10-100 is discriminant compare to a million times a million. It's still useful. But look at these
results in log scale, either for talks here or when
you compare damage results. Sensitivity analysis
and scenario analysis. Sensitivity analysis enabled you to test the robustness of data to the data input
and an assumption. The idea is, you vary the input, you look how the output
vary. Two options. First is you vary each input parameter
by 10 percent and you see if the output vary also by 10 percent, or very little. Problem here you're not
considering that some of these parameters here are
more uncertain than other. Not all parameter are equal. It's better in fact, to vary the input
parameter between the upper and the lower 95
percent confidence limits. You estimate for a
given parameter. This parameter vary
perhaps by 10 percent, but these other parameter
vary by 100 percent, a factor two twice higher, twice lower, for example. You make this
variation according to the given parameter,
and you look at the variation in
final impact estimates. The scenario analysis is a
sensitivity analysis but with discrete changes like change the method of allocation
that you are comparing. For example, instead
of substitution, you use affects
financial allocation. You'd look how this
affects the final results, how the results are
robust for this. Now, sensitivity
analysis usually study one parameter at a time. Now, you can already put sense. This is where you vary different parameter in
fractural experimental plan, for example, where
you take extreme and check all the extreme
from a square. Or then you can perform really
uncertainty propagation. Here you can use the cardinal Monte Carlo
random parameter selection. You do that for the input. You get a results on the output and you repeat
that median of time, and you get a distribution
on your output there. Or they are simpler
way to do that, which is a Taylor series
expansion that I will demonstrate through
an example later on. Finally, empirical
evaluation is really the only way I say
to model validity, but not that easy
to apply for LCA.