When you cannot turn the SimaPro like the Monte-Carlo in SimaPro, you can still use, and here it's called a
Taylor series expansion. It's combining sensitivity study and uncertainty propagation. What you use for each
input parameter, the amount of emission CO2, the amount of per kilo metal, the amount of kilo metal
themselves for each parameter. You vary your inputs, likes by one percent so
Delta input over input, so you vary by a
certain percentage. You look if the output is
varying also by one percent, which will be the case
it's proportional. Or if your input is only
acting on one of the emission, which play only ten
percent of a role, you likely that the output
will vary here by 0.1 percent. Here Sn is 10 of being one, if you have a full
proportionality, will be in that case, only 0.1. Now, to get the GSD square
of my output parameter, it's a combination of all the multiplicative and additive input parameters
that you have. An LCA is a sum of different
multiplied factors. For each factor, you
put here the Sn. For example, for I1 we had
one here one as a factor and here this one is 0.1
percent variation is 0.1, etc. You take this formula
with the GSD square, each input parameter to get the GSD square of the
output and you can use it. You get your log-normal
distribution on the output. The interest is you have
your sum of three term. You can know which parameter contributes has the
highest contribution to your total output. Let's apply that
to our accelerator and add the hands
drying scenario. We see here the
different geo mean, which are about here for
the different scenarios. The accelerator
is clearly lower. Here the standard dryer is
very close to the paper towel. We are very close to each other, which are bit better than the recycled paper
towel, which is here, and which is a bit better
than my standard dryer, which is already
lower than here. Now, all these significant. You see you still have, even with electricity, you
have a small overlap here. The overlap between
two scenario is the probability that we
make a mistake to say the accelerator is better
than the standard dryer or between the two
paper towel this is the overlap between the two. This gives me the probability, the area under the curve,
under the intersection, give me the probability
that in fact, I'm wrong in putting the
hypothesis that paper towel zero percent recycled is better than the 100
percent recycle. That is that true? Is it true that the area
here of the intersection is representative
of the probability of rejecting the hypothesis
I just formulated. In other words, what is the condition for
this to be true? The condition for
this to be true is that the scenario
are independent. But we know in an LCA, we never have really
independent scenario because these two towel had very similar phenomena
and stage contributing. If I come back here, you see that between the 100
percent and zero percent, they are very similar. The same in fact between my two scenario here
for electricity, but these one are
very different to the paper in that case. What we have here is that the scenario are likely
to move in parallel. Meaning that if I have
here a high value for my recycled paper towel, I'm also likely to have
a high value for my non recycled content
paper towel and vice versa if I have a
high value here, I'm also likely to have
a high value here. It means the difference here
remains about the same if the scenario are dependent on each other and the difference is moving in parallel instead
of crossing themselves, it's likely this will be especially true for
the electricity, whereas just a
time which differ. That's where you don't look at each uncertainty separately, but you do look at the
combination and could be the difference or
sometime if we can, it's better to do the
ratio of the scenario, A divided by B. When is A equal to B? This is if A divided
by B is equal to one. What we look is the distribution
of A divided by B here, the accelerator divided
by the standard dryer significantly
different from one. Answer here, very significantly different between the accelerator
and the standard dryer. We see very well that the uncertainty is
very restricted in this ratio because
the two scenario really vary indeed in parallel, is just reducing
the time you use your electric city power of 1,800 watts from 30
second to 10 seconds. This is very robust that
it reduces my emission. We see here we are about 1/3, which reflect this time
of use of my two machine. We see that the
accelerator against the paper towel is
also very significant, no overlap with the one here. This the difference is
sufficient to be significant. The same with the paper
towel, a 100 percent. The accelerator here
is really interesting. Now, what about the paper towel, zero percent versus
a 100 percent? The standard dryer
to the paper towel, which both have a difference. We had a difference of about 10, 15 percent difference in
the optimal difference. What is very interesting is in the case of the standard
dryer to paper towel, we see we have here an area where in fact the standard dryer is in worse than the
paper towel here. This is substantial. This is about 30 percent chance of that the standard dryer
is in fact, not better. But when we compare
with the same about difference of
15 percent here, we are comparing the paper towel to another paper towel
which is recycled. We have very little
here over app. Here we can be confident that the recycled paper towel with the high recycled
content are better than the paper towel
without confidence. Between the standard dryer and the paper towel
and a 100 percent. These two are really
equal and there is no significant difference
about 50 percent of chance, it goes one direction
or the other. These are two
comparable scenarios. Let us conclude LCA with
a lot of number mean that you check and perform
your quality control. I expect you will do that
with your case study. Come to me if you have question, we fix the meeting,
we'll look at that. If you have a problem,
try yourself. You can learn these,
check by yourself, but also get help and
support and expertise. If you cannot find the problem, use LCA explain what's going on. Always at least apply
qualitative analysis of differences like the
10 percent minimum or the factor 10 for topics. You want to apply that
to your case study. You can perform some
simple sensitivity study. Data quality for the input
distribution is often quantified by
log-normal distribution and also for the output. These are good proxy often
for what we need for LCA. When performing an uncertainty
propagation remember, you cannot assume
scenario independency. You need to look at the
difference or the ratio between scenario when you
perform this uncertainty.