Goal and scope definition. Why on earth do we spend
an entire LCA phase, an entire one force of my LCA
just to scope the problem? That's because a problem which is well-defined
is half solved. It's really crucial, as we
saw in the popcorn example, that we define well the basis for comparison,
the metric used, the system boundaries, and that's why this goal and
scope definition is perhaps the most important phase and also sometimes the most
problematic phase in LCA. We start now and we'll spend some time on the goal
and scope definition to really define the
different element which serves the basis
then to calculate inventory of extraction
and impacts which are related to the
problem definition. Our learning objective
for today are to define the goal and
scope of an LCA and for this particular
lecture to identify the intended use and
user of the LCA, the decision context situation, and the intended audience. ISO 14044 give rule and say that in defining
the goal of an LCA, the following item shall be
unambiguously stated and when ISO said shall and not can that mean this
is a requirement. If you want your LCA to be ISO compliant
and ISO compatible, you need to do that, otherwise, you're
not. If these points are not explicitly in your
report you're out, reviewer will not give you the blessing for an
ISO compliance study. You need to define your
intended application, why you're carrying
out the study, who is the intended
audience to whom the results of the study are
intended to be communicated, and whether the
results are intended to be used in a
comparative assertion, meaning comparing
your product with another product explicitly
or even implicitly, and which is intended to be
disclosed to the public. Let's take the example of light bulbs and we will
define the scope and the goal of my LCA for typically comparing incandescent
light bulb with fluorescent or
an LED light bulb. Let's think what would be the objective and
reason for our study. Could be different things
in general for an LCA, could be product information, product development
within the company, defined policy and strategy at governmental or
business level or regulation at a
governmental level. In our case here, we can, for example, provide product information
to select what is the most suitable type of light bulb for a
given application. Typically our targeted
audience here will be consumers
whereas other LCA could be focused on the
governmental body or internal also for product development
inside the company. Then we need to
define the actors and the actors is a sponsor of the study, the
different authors. We'll see what is an advisory board and peer
reviewer in a minute. The more you involve independent
entities in your work, you will enhance the
credibility of your study. Let's look in further detail
about these actors here. The identity of the
main stakeholders and their addresses
should be provided. Let's say for sponsor, typically for this
light bulb study, we would have
consumer association. The author analyst,
of course, it's you, EHS672 consultant who will
become expert in a few weeks. That's your role as in your case study to
carry such a study. Optional advisory board. What is the role of
an advisory board? It's to provide
you the knowledge from different stakeholder
and ensure that all the hypotheses are setup in a fair way and often you
will involve people, for example, here
representative from the bulb manufacturer like astronomer Phillips
or General Electric. The electricity company would
be perhaps interesting, like DTE, the USEPA, or representative from an NGO like environmental defense or different NGO and if you're
a consumer association, you certainly will have someone representing the consumer
association in that. When you select these people, it's nice in fact to select
people who are potentially on the other side of the study. It's nice when you're
on the consumer side to have the bulb
manufacturer represented. Now, who do you choose in there? Two criteria to
choose the people. Knowledgeable, you want people who bring knowledge and
who bring insights. In particular, you're
not a specialist usually from the domain
when you do an LCA so you need to bring people who know about bulb and
will give you insight, will indicate where to
find some of the data, will help you for that. Second, you want them to
be open-minded experts. What I mean by that is you
don't want someone who has decided before the study
what the results should be. You need people who, looking at the evidences, looking at the science, can change their
mind while still representing a
certain stakeholder, and because if this person is well recognized
in his domain, it will give you credibility
and avoid that at the end, people say, they didn't consider one of the main
problem in our story. I have to say, in my experience, one of the first study I did was about rainwater
recuperation and we had a program officer
from the CCPA who was leading that and
a remarkable man, but his boss, at the start of our
study or before even we had signed the contract, basically said rainwater
recuperation is not useful and not applicable
really in Switzerland. We have enough water,
we don't need that. That was embarrassing
to do that. The way I got out
of that was to say, let's add to our
study a scenario of water saving techniques which would certainly or more
likely be of interest, whereas we also
identified, in some cases, rainwater could be of
interest in sub-sequence set. But it was really a
problem to have in fact, one of the person
sponsoring the study and we really had to be
careful to carry out a very independent
work in that case. The independence is
also ensured via optional peer reviewers
and these are really scientists,
independent LCA experts. Could be also from a company, but they are really knowledgeable
in LCA and they are chosen by the sponsor and the study author but should
be independent of you. That's not the people you
work on a weekly basis with. It's not people
within your business, it's people outside which
will give credibility.