You have seen with
the case study, the use of one
life cycle impacts assessment method in detail, which is in IMPACT World+, of course a good method
because it's our methods, but it's not the
only one method. We would like to have an
overview, and I would like to provide you an overview of the different life
cycle IMPACT method, the mostly used and the best
quality method available. Our learning objective is to define the latest life cycle in this student framework and explain you what is in
the work in progress. Identify the characteristic
of our main LCIA methods, and compare results of different damage level life cycle impact
assessment method for the total emission
of the world to see how the different
methods concord or in the contrary,
contradict each other. We are presently working within the life cycle
initiative hosted by UN Environment on
the development of global GLAM3 methods, the global environmental
impact assessment methods. In that frame we see there are some category in
green which have been already developed like
the climate change with the global warming potential,
and the GTP 100 years. In contrast, we have
ongoing work to extend that for example
with climate change, to move to endpoint includes the nutrition, and
the HENI index is the principal candidate. To do that to also
arrive to DALI, so here for all human health, we will be a damage
level with DALI, and include some of the ecosystem services
and biotic resources, which we have here. Different effort on
ecosystem quality, on the resources and to consolidate the
results on human health. It's interesting to backup
a bit and look what is the history of methods
and at the earlier stage, if the equation, the fact
that the first method, operational method
which came out with the eco-scarcity
methods or eco-points, with eco-points in 1990, and it was a distance
to target method. Distance to target, you
compare an emission to the total target for this same effect and you look how distance and
the closer you are, the higher my impact, the further you are
from this target. The further my impact.
There's this method has been kept and has been
updated recently. It's still usable, but it's not really based
on the damage oriented. It's, on the other hand, at the midpoint level, it's really the CML
LCA guide in '92, which has opened
the field there, which is ideal that you
separate impacts in different category as we saw in the previous framework slide. They really were breaking it. It was a really great report by colleague who are still
working in the field. They are dead in CML. That guide in 2002,
a bit disappointing. It was same story, not much innovation in 10 years as we thought they could
have done in that case. In parallel to these
mid point tide, we start having pioneer method, which was in 1992 already, which was EPS, which was
developed in Sweden here for us. And by a colleague Bernstein who in term of the framework, really foresee the
damaged side, and was really a precursor before
most of the other people. The only problem and he update
these method in 2000 is the realization the quality of the factor was not up to
the level of the framework. This is a method
which has never, I would say, imposed
itself here. Still in Holland,
this was CML was enlightened University
in Holland. Another method came
out in '95 was updated in '99 also
distance to target, but at European level, this ecoindicator
that we have here. An important milestone is here. These people unite together. Here with the people from CML, also from Holland, plus
some Swiss people in fact, but I was not involved in
that to produce one of the mostly used methanol
recipe in 2008. But prior to that, we had come with
impact 2002 plus here with the first
really mattered, which was combining the
midpoint and damage. You really had both the different impact category moving to impact
on human health, and impact on
ecosystem and produce this first real
implementation of a midpoint damage approach here, and we updated this between 2013-2019 with the
impact well plus method here, which is really a
global methods. I have different global methods
which are now available, but it was really the
first global method made available already
early 2013 there. Recipe has an update here, which is also really good midpoint damage methods that combined the midpoint
and the damage. It's probably the most used
method that you could take as one of the defaults
you want to use. The team from recipe in backward plus we worked together
for a very specialized, I would say method, which has just come out. I don't think it will last
forever in the sense, it was a bit less consistent
than the individual method, but had some
advantages when you're studying some very
specialized impact category. The third, if you like, family of method which is
really important, and in the midpoint damage is a line method which is
from Japanese colleague. They go to a full waiting. They do the a wonderful job on the weighting of indicators, which was really, I would say an exceptional work
from our colleagues. In parallel with that, we have at the different
federal level for US, we have TRACI 2003
updated in 2011, done by Jane Bear in Cincinnati, which is really a
solid midpoint method, not super innovative to
bring the damage together, but still at midpoint is
the recommended method for the US and is being updated
to my knowledge presently. In Europe, the product's environmental
footprint to cover, it started with compendium of
different methods in 2012. That very original, I was still involved
with colleague. But we had the explicit request
not to do anything new, and they updated it last year, and this is also good
and solid method. Finally, we have this GLAM, global impact assessment
with two workshop 2016, '18, and we are
presently working, coordinating here
about 100 scientists worldwide to arrive to a
global method which would be a consensus to avoid people could have to select too much of a method
or make choices there. Say as a default
method to be used, and then compare eventually
still with another one. These different methods have different coverage of
the midpoint category. Here for the main method
that we could recommend, the ecological scarcity, TRACI for the US, I say 2003 but also 2011, IMPACT 2002 and IMPACT
World Plus which are here. The line method
recipe 2008 and 2013, the path protection
environmental footprint, the work of the
life-cycle initiative and find the NCAA impact. You see the midpoint
coverage and there is a relatively a good coverage
of this midpoint category, and for the damage level, then some of them are only
having normalization, and some will have, that the case really for the US, and we have really some method which
have the midpoint and the damage that can be
used in the best way. So cover our human health, ecosystem quality, and
natural resources. Some I have some biotic
resources in addition.