Finally let's compare the method,
how different are they in their results. And a nice way to look at that is, to take the worldwide impact
on normalization flows. Calculated by taking the total
emission in each inventory flow times, the characterization factor. And we see the results for ReCiPe,
IMPACT2002+ and IMPACT World+ this is published in our impact world plus
publication of bill volatile 2019. What is interesting is you see
a relatively good concordance for the highest impact. So when we look between ReCiPe,
climate change, particular matter in IMPACT World+,
climate change, this is 100 years first. And then you have after 100
years impact which are here and particular now the water
is also particularly here. But the water is also important and the
water was not considered really in ReCiPe. Human toxicity are coming so
find particular is here and
we find that also as important. Toxicity is a bit middle ground here depending on the cancer and
then cancer and in ReCiPe also is is slightly
lower importance here. And also in the middle ground for the impact that impact doesn't have
the climate change on human health. It kept it separate so
we cannot compare it on the same scale. But it's interesting also the category
with the lowest impact are uniting radiation photochemical formation,
this is also what we find in impact. Well, plus, so
there is here good concordance. The Japanese method arrived
to climate change and PM as the highest in 10 -2
daily per person per year. And you see we we are exactly
in the same range here. So relatively good concordance. This was human health, you can do
the same for the ecosystem quality. And we see here slightly
more different but we see climate change and
land occupation as some of the top level. And we see that also climate change and
the land occupation are also top. What we have in a different is
freshwater exostosis is different here between the two. And we have again that uniting
radiation is really negligible for the ecosystem in our case. Confirming if like that we
have low level terrestrial acidification is a bit more
prominent in impact ReCiPe. So, overall a relatively good concordance
between method with some differences. And that's why we suggest that
you always use a second method to confirm that your main conclusion for
your case study are robust. We see some first sign of maturity
as a scientific area, okay. Still improving life cycle impact
system is still in improving. First, we have seen a very high level
of collaboration between the impact assessment field and risk assessment. Indoor pollution which show that we
are really partner in the story. First we had adapted risk
assessment to make it comparative. And then we brought back comparative
with innovative development and that made us interesting for
the people from risk assessment. And that's why I was in
fact high here in the risk science center when we
we it was existing here. We start to be published in
the best environmental journal and the international journal of LCA. Okay, together with the journalist
industry ecology journal of cleaner production is
producing a lot of paper. But their index here
the importance has grown up to 4.3 being making this journal
number 26 out of 350. That's reasonably good that we see. Conclusion always at least include
the main information on given effect. If you want to model LCIA you
need to take all relevant aspect of the cause effect chain,
okay, cause effect. Why, because some people judge for
example make judgment just on the intrinsic toxicity, neglecting
the fate which is a factor of million. You cannot neglect the factor of million. Okay, and so
far use several typically two or three impact assistant method usually
do most of the work with one. And you test your final results,
a new final conclusion with the other. So in your case study you can choose
either as a basis like impact 2002 or TRACI or ReCiPe and
then use one of the other as a comparison. I'm not entirely sure if impact
well place will be available. It might not be available in
Cima Pro easily for this year