Let us look at
life-cycle assessment, LCA from A to Z, from beginning to end through an example of
bio-based material. But to introduce that, three weeks ago, I ordered
just a connector like that, which is HDMI to C connector
here and I ordered it, I wanted the second one, I ordered it on the Internet. This is the package
I have received. You see that they
were sending me this. That's what I got. I'm curious to see what we
exactly have inside here. Usually when you send
the package like that, that will be filled, for example you might have, as we such a big package, you might have some
polystyrene like that chips which are in there. In 1992, I was approached by students to do my first
LCA and asked me to say, could you consider as
an alternative here to the polystyrene chips? What and this is my
other box today, I have a few boxes. Look, what we could use
is in fact popcorn. But somewhat a strange idea. But indeed, there was a grower in the German-speaking
part of Switzerland, which was in fact
importing corn from Iowa, from his son in Iowa, and creating packaging material, filling material instead
of polystyrene peanuts. Let's look at the
objective for today before we move to
the study itself. We want to qualitatively compare first the advantage and problem associated with
different products and here are bio-based versus polystyrene here and identify the most critical elements
when comparing products. We had these polystyrene
peanuts to fill in packaging and we took as
an alternative popcorn. What is the problem
with polystyrene? What's one of the main problem, and the first one is that it's non-degradable and when we look at the qualitative
product comparison, let's look at the problem
and the strengths associated with each
of these materials. Polystyrene is non-degradable. Second thing is, what is polystyrene made of? if I take these polystyrene
chips here, what is it? The answer, this is pure oil. This is really oil material. In fact, for one-kilo plastic, you have one-kilo oil that
I'm holding in my hands. But in addition, you have a
second kilo oil equivalent, which is to manufacture
the plastics. You have two kilo
per kilo plastic or kilo equivalent
because it could be different sources of energy. The problem here is we have non-renewable energy
which is used. We use the same
quantity of oil for plastic manufacturing plus
what is inside there. The advantage of polystyrene
chips or peanuts, is that we have good
protection from my material, efficient
air capture. It's relatively light
and it's reusable. Now let us think
about what popcorn, and let's start with the
advantages of popcorn. Popcorn, does it address the non-degradable
of polystyrene? Yes, popcorn is degradable
so this is good. What about the
non-renewable energy? If we think of that, what is in fact popcorn made up? How do we make this
plot column here? This is very
interesting to think. Popcorn is a pressure cooker. If you take a popcorn
kernel and you have a hard outer shell here, and inside you have
starch and you have, even if it's a dry corn, you still have about 13 percent
water inside my kernel. I arrive with hot air. What's happening
with our hot air, the steam here start
to increase and pressure is increasing
inside my kernel. If the outer shell
is really strong, and that's why my
farmer was importing the popcorn from Iowa because the Swiss popcorn doesn't
have a strong enough shells. With this, the steam pressure is really increasing until it arrived to the outer shell
rupture and it's an explosion. As the vapor is everywhere
inside is through an expansion which bring
it and create my popcorn. What was interesting, we
measured with this farmer together about half a
cubic meter popcorn, which is about 3 feet by 3
feet by 2 feet of popcorn. I could feel the entire
research station. I was working in an
agronomic research station in the German speaking part
of Switzerland at that time, and we measured just
after the explosion. We had, in fact four
percent water here, which was much less
than the 13 percent. Really prove this effect
of pressure cooker where the water goes
out here largely data. Now after a small
while, in fact, it takes back the water and
come back to 13 percent, which is an advantage
because we wanted to protect well the different
object we put here, and to be a bit smooth, which is better than
we don't want it to be crispy as we want when
we eat the popcorn. Let's come back to the energy. In fact, the popcorn is
mostly renewable energy. We still have the
hot air in addition, but mostly it's a cornfield, is a very cheap
enlarge solar panel. If you compare it to
a photovoltaic panel, one squire meter
or 10 square feet, is about $2,000, or at least $1,000
per square meter. The field, 10,000 square meter, just a few thousand dollar. Efficiency is not super high, but in term of corn maize is a C4 plant which fixes
four carbon atom at each cycle of
photosynthesis and has 50 percent higher efficiency than the C3 plants like wheat, for example for doing bread, we will fix only three carbonized
filament is less efficient. So we have in fact, this nice renewable energy and we could potentially
feed an animal. We don't want to eat it for us at least because depending on what has been and
what could be leached from the product which
is inside my packaging, that could be problematic. But we could feed animal, but you don't want to create
a whole fracture extra to recuperate such a material
that will be really hard. Now, problems is degradable. That's an advantage, but also a problem because you
don't want it to degrade, so it's less likely to be
reusable in that case. It's crispy so we need to
remove the small particle, and that was interesting
because then my grower, if you take a piece of
popcorn that we have here, it has these small things here, and he would have a big drum with holes
and it will turn round, turning my popcorn
until you really create balls like
that of popcorn. These one were really
good for the packaging. I say they were a bit smooth. In terms of function, it was functioning pretty
good in that case. The question, the
ethical question, and we come back in the end, is, should we use foods
for packaging? Is it ethical when
people in the earth are dying from
hunger to do that? I'll come back on that question. My students made some surveying in the street
with that at that time. Let us now, based on this
quantity for comparison, vote. I'm a Swiss guy, we love
voting as Swiss people, and I will ask you
how many times is, from an environmental
perspective popcorn better than polystyrene? Is it 10,000 time? 1,000 time? 100 time? Ten time? Twice, or equal, or even worse than polystyrene? Let's have a small
vote and we will reconvene in a few minutes, or when we will take
the next slides here.