So let's continue our LCA from A to Z. And our example of bio-based material. But this time let's go to Part B,
which is the quantitative and really the life cycle assessments of. If we want to do better
than our intuition and our qualitative discussion,
LCA is there exactly for that to try to analyze in
detail what's going on. So our learning objective
is described the different objective of each of the LCA phase. We'll identify these phases and look what
they are doing through this example and identify the most critical element when
comparing these two packaging product for filling material, either the bio-based or
the oil-based materials. Okay, so quantitative life cycle
assessment is an environmental assessment method, and
it first defined the goal and scope phase number one of the LCA
defining the golden scope of the study. Seems a bit simple or
obvious, but it's not. In fact that's where they could be the
most bias is probably at this stage here. Once we have defined our system
boundaries in particular we will perform the inventory and determine
the inventory of resource extraction and of emission for
example as a mission the NOx C02. Or carbon monoxide CO,
which is emitted over the whole life cycle of my polystyrene from
resource extraction up to use and disposal over the whole
life cycle of the product. And in addition then we will look
all these different emission. We will look at the impact assessment what
impact they have on humans and ecosystem. And finally, we will, phase four is to interpret which
is in fact all the way through. We interpret after the goal definition
after the inventory of extraction and mission and
of course after the impact assessment. Let's see how to apply
that to our popcorn story. So if we take a renewable here
packing material system boundaries, we first have to extract the energy
from the soil, the oil, refine it. We use this energy within
an industry which is for example, preparing the fertilizer that
you apply on your field and then on your field you
might have nitrate or phosphate leaching which is
living here the emission. Ammonia emitted in to the air NH3 for
example. Denitrification, this is N20 which
is also a greenhouse gas and in addition I will have my tractor which
is having some emissions that I have here. In this study from 1992, we didn't
have the infrastructure covered for all the oil extraction for
my oil-based material. So as I didn't have that,
we excluded the tractor. I was in a research station,
an economical reserve station, so I could have in fact model my tractor but
to be a bit consistent here we did that. Nowadays, the databases have
the infrastructure, and we don't need to exclude that. So we will include it. We transport our corn, we dry it, then we transport it to the place
where we will have my big popcorn blower with hot hair and
I can put it in my package. We excluded here the usage of the package,
but we included the waste disposal either
by incinerating it or by composing it, which is one of the advantage of
the popcorn that you could compost it. Okay, so we've done our system boundaries. Now, we are looking for
each of these processes. We have emission and
these emissions are crossing the boundary and
the inventory is in fact the sum of all the emission which
are crossing the boundary. Or all the resources which
are arriving from the ground taken from the ground into my product system. Results here for the emission and
extraction inventory, polystyrene versus popcorn. So let's ask me back to the question, how many times is popcorn
better than polystyrene? According to this inventory where
we have carbon dioxide particle, carbon monoxide, ammonia nitrates and
the energy is just a small extract. At that time I had about 30 flows and
now as an ecoinvent will have more than 1000 nearly
flows which are modeled. So how many times better? Okay, we can say carbon dioxide, this is about 9 time
better popcorn particle. This is about 6 time better for
carbon monoxide. This is about 3.4 time better. But, and
let's perhaps finish the better part where 81 it's more than 10 time better for
the energy. So we should say [SOUND] this is
about three to six times better. But we see that for any three. In fact, it's worse here and
worse for nitrate. Why for this emission? Because this emission
associated with agriculture. So we could expect that ammonia and
nitrates which are coming from the fertilizer's application would
bring some additional emission here. So we have a trade-off to analyze. So what is more important is
it the greenhouse gas emission like C02 or
is it this agriculture emission here? That's the goal of an impact
assessment to determine that. And here I'm taking the impact 2002
which is the method we developed in the early 2000 in my team
when I was still in Switzerland. And the results this emission and
extraction are transferred and waited to give a score in each of these
impact category like human toxicity, fine particular respiratory effects, whether we have the global
warming effect for example. Or the non-renewable
energy that we have here. And then we aggregate all the human
data together to human health score which is in DALYS that
we have seen and used already. Ecosystem qualities and other at this
stage we were keeping the climate saying separate as an impact
separate damage category, and we had the resource extraction which
was energy based in that case. So we do that, and we combine and
at this stage I didn't have at that time yet
impact 2002 we were 1992. So I had developed this
critical surface time method, critical volume in a which was
just comparing two talks here. We were taking the fate of substance. So that was a better method here. And this is a target based method
comparing to the to the national target of reduction. For each you see the composition here
is each of the substance polluting. We find them the contribution
to the total impact and we've taken here 100% for polystyrene and popcorn is the second column for
each of these three methods here. So by watch factor is polystyrene
better than popcorn per kilo material. Okay, we see about three
times better here. Nearly four times better here and
2.5 times better here. So 3 to 4 times better. That's probably what we see
here after our impact assessment. So we could conclude popcorn
after the quantity of assessment is 3 to 4 times
better than polystyrene. Really. Okay. Think a bit. Take a critical view of how
the assessment is performed. Don't we have some bias somewhere. Think of it