We could conclude popcorn, after the quantitative
assessment is 3-4 times better
than polystyrene. Really? Think a bit, take a critical view of how
the assessment is performed. Don't we have some bias
somewhere? Think of it. That's where the
goal definition, where the scope and goal is
important because what is the function of our
filling material? Is it to get kilogram because
my assessment here I told was an impact per kilo material but our goal is not to
have the maximum kilogram. On the contrary,
that will cost at the post office when
we are sending it. What really we are
after is to fill in my package here, and to have to fill it in the
lightest way possible. Unit instead of kilogram
should be rather volume unit. A volume for one use, probably if we start
reusing it but if a function is
packaged filling then this best represented by a cubic meter, and what links
kilogram to cubic meter? This is a density. It happens that in fact, my popcorn is several time better 4.6 times heavier
than my polystyrene. What does it mean? It means that the results for my popcorn relative to polystyrene I'll multiply
by these key factor 4.6. What do we get? This
is our results. Intact this time per cubic meter material
or gallon or liter material, and we see
that the popcorn is in fact equivalent or
rather worse in fact, that my polystyrene, disappointing for the bio
material in that case. Now, what is the key parameters
which made popcorn worse? This is in fact
essentially the density. The key and from an environmental point of view is in fact not in the hands of an environmental engineer or an environmental health
practitioner, but is in the hands of a
material scientist. That's pretty interesting here. Number of reuse would
be also important. We see that we have in fact 460 percent
improvement potential here by changing the density. If we can reach
the same density, that will be great. We know that we had a
good potential, but it was ruined by the
largest weight. Generally speaking,
if packaging is four times heavier than the plastic, it's likely that
it will be worse. I would say that the cutoff
is around 3-4 times. If you start having 3-4 time
heavier bio-based material, you are in trouble. I was relatively furious
when we republished in 1994 this study, and one NGO took it and concluded that bio-based
material are bad, and that's not the
point we were making. They are bad only
because they don't treat the same properties
and these properties, these function are really
key and should be done. We have to be careful how
we interpret things here. The second thing which
was interesting is here, natural is different from
environmental friendly. We have a good sense
of what is natural, we have a relatively bad
sense and we could be biased on what is
environmental friendly. The third point is that material function and
the service offered by a product is essential, and we can have some synergy between
technological solution, environmental
economy for example, in our case, to reduce weight. Let me come back on the
question of ethical. When doing the survey people had a problem that we
were using popcorn which can be eaten here,
and use this for packaging but my point of view on that is if you start thinking about
that a bit seriously, what are we doing presently? Our economy is largely oil-based and fossil
based and with that, we are consuming, in fact the
square meter of the past. We are using
millions of hectares and square feet yards
at very high speeds. Once we will have used that, we will need to use our area, our land area and
our forest, and our production to produce both food for people
and also material. It's interesting because when
people have this sort of material here which is
also in fact bio-based, they're made of starch but this time they're expanded properly, and reach a density factor of 1.6 higher than
the polystyrene. This is already better for the environment than the
polystyrene in our case. If you put them; this one in water, I put here 20 minutes ago the same as this one, look
what's happening. This is my polystyrene, it will stay forever. Now, this is my starch-based
material and I'm getting here completely dissolved
in a while that we can see. Pretty cool to see that. What was really hard with
this study I can tell you is I worked with a
farmer during a whole day, he took his time to welcome
me to work with him. We measured this half a
cubic popcorn and waited the propane bottles before and after producing our popcorn. It was really nice a person about 65 to 70 years old
innovating new things, and I had to tell
him that what he was doing was not environmental
friendlier than polystyrene. That was humanly speaking
pretty hard in fact, but we're scientists
and LCA is often surprising, and sometime we don't please our sponsors
and that's okay. He was not sponsoring
us in that case, but that was that. Let's finish and come
back to my packaging. Now if I open it here, see what I'll get. I'm curious, what
do we find here? We see what is here, and I was expecting that. Nowadays we don't use
polystyrene peanuts. That's the type of material,
and it's a factor of 10 even better than the
polystyrene peanut. This is really smart because
this is packing lots of air really compared to the
polystyrene chips, but look what they put in here. My connector now is
inside a cardboard, I weighted it as I say and
this was 20 gram here. This is 220 gram
that we have here, and inside there is another plastic and in the
plastic what do we have? We have the envelope. They could have sent me that directly,
this is a bit crazy. Let's open my envelope. I hope to find my connector
otherwise I'll be in trouble. This is hard work. Lucky enough there
is another plastic and indeed in there, you can see my connector. What really would have
been the best is really sending me that and we
get completely rid, and that's where also we need to think out of the box in
term of alternative, how can we avoid
completely that here? It also raises the question of environmental friendliness of having delivery at your house which could be debated because
if I have to go express to the next Best Buy or
whatever with the car, usually I go well
by bike but if it's further I might go with a
car, and my wife's car. In that case you would in fact consume quite a lot
of energy and a truck who would stop in the different houses might be more efficient in that case. In summary, we have identify
through this example the different LCA phases
and their main objective. The goal and scope
definition phase is there to set up the problem,
and the way to address it. The inventory then determine the extraction and emission
which are crossing the system boundary defined in the first phase and calculate them per
functional unit here, a cubic meter
transported, in our case. The impact assessment phase is there to make this
different emission comparable, and arrive to interpret the results
after each phase here. This example make us
recognize that function is critical and a main point of departure for
comparing products. This is really crucial. We'll come back in the
goal definition to define this functional unit
is unit to compare products. LCA enable us to go beyond
sometime biased intuition. I would say about one
out of three LCA I'm doing, I'm really surprised
by what we are thinking, and I
come out of it with a different view and what was key on the problem
in many cases. It's a fun domain to
work and to explore even after 30 years
of work in that area.