The ecoinvent database provide
these two types of data. It provides unit process level. These are processes which
are called with U, which have the detail of direct elementary flow
and intermediary. It means with any data
you always account for the 4,000 other
processes to get it. It's complicated, but you
have a high level of detail, which is really nice
when you want to just modify one of these process. You just modify
exactly what you want and you can rerun it
and get your results. The second level, which is
easier to use and I recommend, I would say that you use the system level by default when you will
work on SimaPro. It's the aggregated
elementary flow that you have for a given product summed up over the entire supply chain. No intermediary flow here, only total elementary flow
per functional unit or per kilo of the commodity
that we are defining. Many other databases don't
have the same resolution, only offer aggregated flow, which is problematic because you cannot modify them easily. So you have to ask the
people who've done the data to modify them, which some company like to keep their customer
dependent on them, but personally and in
our quantities company, we are trying to affect
our customer independence. They will need us because
we didn't need to be always cutting edge and
we'll have the next ID. Such aggregate
inventory flow for different processes can
be directly used to build the inventory of new
products and we see with a car example how once you have these
aggregated system level flow, you can use them
relatively easy, even Excel spreadsheet to build the impact of a given
product so in summary, the inventory phase
of the LCA determine the elementary flow or emission and extraction
per functional unit. Accounting for the
entire processes which contribute to
the project function. The inventory is
calculating by combining the intermediary flow
per functional unit and the elementary flow per unit of the same unit process to get the total per functional
unit at each level. So it's important that we don't mix the intermediary direct and the aggregated
elementary flow over our products system. Finally, the good news is that we have a lot
of inventory data. The bad news is correcting
even one process for inventory data on
the intermediary and elementary flow is
really hard work. So you need direct
contact with company, or you need to go
in the literature, it's pretty hard work. But the beauty is we have a lot of processes
which are existing. We can rely on that and
just do it for what is needed as a complement
to what we already have.