Let's give you a slightly
more in-depth view of these individual methods looking shortly
at the framework. LCIA Impact 2002+, if you use it, it's
still relatively valid. One important thing is
that it has damaged category or area of
protection, the human health, the ecosystem quality,
the resources, but we had kept climate change
as a separate category. Now when we move
to IMPACT World+, what we did is we start to do the modeling of the impact
of climate change on the biodiversity,
and on human health, and that IMPACT World+
is considering that. But at that time in 2002, we thought we were not
accurate enough to go and cover the anti-storage. IMPACT World+ you've
seen the method applied to the kgeq study,
the front-end panel. It was based on 2002 here, but it provides now factor for each continent, and allow some regional assessment
which is important, especially for the water
use and for acidification. For example, it depends a lot where you emit and what are the quality of the soil or the amount of water
scarcity in the region. It was the first
implementation of the USEtox model,
and also having a water use impact included
in a full LCIA method. Major improvement in
modeling land use, water, and resource use. For acidification and
eutrophication it has world atmospheric and world
hydrological fate model to really study this
in a special way. The respiratory effects,
the fine particulates have new intake fraction, and use the GBD, epidemiological
derived factor. When interests of
IMPACT World+ is that you can base your
assessment on the area of protection or on the
area of concern that our carbon footprint and the
water footprints here. In a compatible way
and consistent way, you can look at
these two aspects. ReCiPe goes the whole way
through from my life-cycle, inventory results
to the results in midpoint category to then go to a damage or an endpoint
for human health, ecosystem resources, and
eventually to a single score. One originality of
ReCiPe is to have a cultural perspective, and three different cultural
individualistic. Honesty, I don't know why they incorporated that because if you're individualist
you don't do LCIA. You're just looking at what
is in your back garden, and you don't mind life-cycle. That's my own bias. The two which are
really interesting, the hierarchical methods. The hierarchical methods will consider mostly certain
prove with certain impacts. You need to be proven
to be incorporated. Whereas the third thing, which is egalitarian, you have more protective
perspective to say, we take everything, best
estimate of all impact whereas they are really observed or their potential and accepted. This is especially
valid for the toxicity. Here we have all impacts
considered in that case. The default one is
your hierarchical. If you run it by default, this is the one people
usually suggest. TRACI. Tragedy
consistent methods. Well-designed. Doesn't have the damage as a PT they haven't
moved to there. For the cancer and non-cancer, they also have been
using USEtox in the latest revision of 2011 and we worked in collaboration with
Jane Bear for that. LCIA guidance Volume 1. This was this workshop from the UN and it's an ongoing work, but Volume 1 had
the greenhouse gas, particulate matter,
water use, land use. The footprint indicator
recommendation that we saw at the
start of this class, were coming also
from this report. Two years later, the second workshop we had:
acidification, eutrophication, ecotoxicity, human toxicity, the soil quality and
some mineral resources. I say we are now working
on the third level. Here we had all our indicator, which were for single category and probably one of the most interesting
indicator which was developed at that time was the aware
characterization factor for available water
remaining methods. The idea is to say we have our characterization
factor or impact is a function of the inverse of the water remaining because the less water you
have available, the highest your water
scarcity and your problems. How do we get this
water remaining? This is the availability from rainwater minus the demand, and the demand has
two different part. One is human consumption. This is very clear. The second is a minimum environmental
requirements to keep the biodiversity
in a river if you reuse the flow too much
because you construct a dam, there won't be any fish, so there is a minimum
requirement in the region. In addition, the CF
are limited when you look at that between
0.1 and 100; 100 being the max scarcity
that we can have. This indicator here,
what I like is to divide it by the mass
scarcity to take this CF divided by 100 and it expresses the water scarcity level in the watershed as a
fraction of the maximum, which would be 100
cubic meter meter world equivalent in that case. Where do we see high water
scarcity in the world? Not surprising, west coast
here of US and Mexico. We have of course
the Arabic country and Sahara region in Africa. Then in fact, in Central Asia, we have up to China, a lot of desertic area. Finally, to have the Australia where you
have water in the coast, but most of the other
area are relatively dry. You see that depending on
where you are you count that one cubic meter is equivalent to 0.01 cubic meter
in the blue zone, but will be equivalent up to 100 cubic meter average or I would say if you
divide here by a hundreds, that's why I prefer. That will be you have an
index which go to basically 0-1 and one being full scarcity, full competition between the different user
of that region.