So once we have done our dispatch and we know which substance to consider for
given category, we now would like to give
the relative weight of the different substance in that category. And for this we will develop what
we call characterization factor and that's why it's called midpoint
characterization here. And give for
each scenario weight the emission C02 and methane that gives the relative
weight too arrived to a contribution to a given
in fact impact category. Like here's a climate change
short term which will have like CH4 also contributing
two weeks in that case. Okay, so how do we do that? We've in fact already practiced
that with the carbon footprint. We express the inventory flow,
each of the inventive flow of this impact category into a reference
substance for that category. So for carbon footprint,
the reference substance was C02. So we express our CH4 in C02 equivalent. Okay.
And this expression is the, what we call the midpoint characterization factor for
substance I in category M. Is the equivalency how many kilos
C02 is methane equivalent to? Okay, so this was we know that for
methane we were at 34. It was by a genic to 36 in the case of of CH4 that we can have here. And the score is a weighted
sum of the inventory flow, the amount of C02 emitted, the amount
of methane emitted per a functional unit time the CF here,
my characterization factor. So we get kilo I per functional
unit time kilo C02 per kilo I if I take the carbon footprint. So I get kilo C02 per functional unit. So it will be in kilo of
reference substance for the category M per functional
unit that I get the score. What are these reference substance? Quickly we know with global warming
we have the kilo C02 equivalent. Marine eutrophication it's only kilo C02
because it's really the concentration of C02 in the atmosphere. And not so
much the other greenhouse gasses which is modifying the concentration in the ocean. Land occupation it's a hectare
use over a year time a year. And we take the arable
land equivalent to measure an impact on biodiversity facilities. Mega joule deprived kilo mineral
is kilo deprived of minerals, water use a cubic meter. Water acidification is kilo S02. Classic aquatic
eutrophication is kilo P04 P. And the marine eutrophication is kilo and
kilo nitrogen in that case. The CTU is a specialty from use talks and it's which is the NFC tag toxicity model. And it is in fact comparative toxic units and you have for humans and for ecosystem here or for humans. For humans,
in fact these are cases of cancer. Okay. And all cases of non cancer. So it's a new incidence of cancer or
of non cancer. We have baptized them comparative toxic units to avoid people to take the absolute value to I mean on regulatory basis. So we don't want people suing other to
say you are killing so many people or creating so many cases of cancer. But it's rather really a comparative
metric that we want to. Br C14 equivalent for ionizing radiation. The PM 2.5 equivalent for fine particulate
or respiratory and organic kilo. Non methane VOC. Volatile organic compounds for
the respiratory organic or colossal photo accident formation. Okay. And the ozone layer
depletion is in CFC-11. How does it work? We've already experienced this mechanic. We had this 253.9 kilo C02
per a functional unit for front-end panel multiplied by
one is the same 0.15CH4 here. And you see that we still
use here the IPCC 2007 data. And you will always very often have that. That you have always, when you quote
C02 equivalent, you need to be sure what was the value used and
that we are consistent when we compare. Here that was 25. We've seen we are now at
the recommendation of 34 biogenic and 36 for the fossils due to accounting for
feedback with the ocean. But we have 25. 0.15 times 25. Another 3.8 and
two we are not in agriculture production. So these are relatively small and
we get a total of 258. We can play the same game
with the fine particulate. Now the only difference
we have you refined by car 0.383 of kilo PM 10 in that case. And basically it's considered
in larger particular that only the fraction below 2.5 microns is
the one responsible for the effect. So the effect here is 0.6 because we have
about 60% of the PM 10 R PM 2.5 in weight. And so
we multiply 0.38 by 0.6 we get 0.023 and we do that for each substance. Whereas you have to be careful for SO2. This is a secondary
particular SO2 combines with any history gets ammonium sulfate and
so the the kilo. Here we get kilo PM 2.5
per kilo really knocks or S02 knowing there is
a transformation in between. So how does it work? Kilo SO2 0.49 kg SO2
perfection in unit time, 0.0 38 the kilo is to go away. We get 0.017 kg PM 2.5
per functional unit. Which is what we have here we
do the sum we arrive to 0.042. This is for
my front-end panel per functional unit. So now we can repeat that for
all categories and also for all scenarios. And that's what we have done and
that's what we get. Okay. So we have taken as a reference,
we don't have really a good metric at this point to know if a category
is more important than another. So we put them with the highest
scenario here at 100%. Okay. So question which scenario is best and
which scenario is worst? Have a look at these results a bit
carefully you can pose if you like. Okay, so
we see that in all this first category we have the steel which is high also here and
the last one. But we have two categories where
the aluminum is higher and this is in fact ionizing radiation and for the aquatic toxicity we also have that. And that that's for the ionizing radiation this is linked to
the electrolysis and use electricity. So there is also a usage
of nuclear power for that. And then for aquatic toxicity this
is direct effect from aluminum depending on the cell
ability of the aluminum. Now what is the best scenario? So potentially the steel
will be the worst. But we're not really sure unless we
can show that ionizing radiation and aquatica talks on that dominant
impact on human health for ionizing radiation and
ecosystem for aquatic talks. On the recycled aluminum side you
can see that the recycle aluminum scenario is usually lower but
not always ionizing radiation. Again, aluminum is remain higher. Here's noncasinogen we have
it a bit higher and here for the aquatic eutrophication we have
a small difference to a knowledge. Potentially best scenario
recycle aluminum. But again we need
the next step in fact and we need to give respective importance
of each impact category and this is the role of
the damage characterization, which is the step three after this one. So summary the midpoint characterization
factor, enable to compare and possibly aggregate chemical
within each impact category. So within a category we can then identify
the inventory flows which dominant contribution as we saw CO2 was
dominating for the global warming. And here for the PM we see we have two
important contribution SO2 is important and the PM 10 is also the second
important contribution. So we can really identify
what matters most. And finally the midpoint characterization
does not provide insight on the respective important
of each impact category. That's the important that we assess
impact at damage level on a common damage metric with each
damage impact category. For example in DALY's for human health. Okay. And we will take it means all different
impact category contributing to human health impact like global warming,
ozone depletion, cancer, non cancer or water use are all contributing and fine
particulates are contributing to that. And we want then to calculate the
respective contribution of each of these midpoint category to the total, which will put them in perspective
in an interesting way.