Now that we know how to determined impact score
within an impact category, question is how much these different impact score
contribute to the damage, and is the damage
relevant and important? If we look at our present world, it's true that the present
damage is absolutely relevant. I just take as an example, I took these pictures
here in 2014, six years ago in Kangaroo
Island near South of Adelaide. A beautiful island, about 80 miles long,
something like that. This year, beginning of January, a series of fire took place
and with climate change, half of the island
was destructed, and including the
area where I had taken this Koala at 5:00 AM
with sunrise behind his ear. It's sad, I would say
consequences of our behavior. It's really worse that we look at our different products, and see how we could
identify what matters, and then mitigate these
different impacts. Let's look at that with our front-end panel
case study from going to midpoint score
to damage scores. Learning objective, determine
damage impact scores from inventory and
midpoint results. Interpret the LCIA
results at damaged level. Apply impact World plus, add damage level to our
car case study. Then compare and identify the most and least
relevant impact category for this particular case study. Damage characterization is there the third step in our life
cycle impact assessment. It is based on natural science, so no, I would say social
preference, a priori. It aims to quantify the contribution of
each midpoint category, to one or more damage category associated with main
areas of protection. From the midpoint level, climate change
here, for example, short-term, we determine in fact two impacts related
to climate change. The climate change
on human health, which is one of the area
of protection here, but also the climate
change impacts, as we've just seen
with Kangaroo Island, on ecosystem quality, and what is related to it. One midpoint impact category could contribute at
several end point, even if the number of area of protection
is all these three. We have this list of different damage category
that we can keep separate, and we have a lot of results or we can group them and
then show the different, and compare the different
contribution to human health. All the arrows arriving here, are the different
contribution to ecosystem quality of finally to the resource and
instrumental services. How do we calculate them? Really simple, multiply
and sum in the end. Damage score express
the midpoint flow of the reference substance
of the category into an absolute damage. For example, for fine
particle at impact, we will translate
the kilo_pm 2.5, into this [inaudible]
adjusted life years score. Note that damage is not
a term defined by ISO. We did life-cycle initiative, we just redefine it clearly; damage score describe the damage inflicted upon
category endpoint. Endpoint it being a term
which is defined in ISO. Personally, I do prefer the
term damage to endpoint, because endpoint
in risk assessment has different meaning. An endpoint is typically the health outcome
which is considered, or the organ which is looked at in rat
toxicity for example. Whereas here endpoint is
really a synonym of damage, and you will find both in the literature or in the different impact
assessment method, they are really synonyms. How do we get from the
midpoint score in category m, for example, global
warming, to a damage, for example, on human health? We use MDF here, which is category specific, and damaged specific there's the link between the impact
category and the damage, and its risk called
a midpoint to damage factor from category m to damage d. If we
take the category, find particulate unit of
this MDF DALY kilo_pm. They multiply the main
point which was in Kilo_PM2.5 equivalent and
per functional units. When we do this multiplication, we find simply DALY per functional unit since the
two kilo are getting away. Note that we can either
do the sum here or we also can keep the score for each impact category separate
and just compare them. In that case, we made
them comparable. We don't necessarily need
to go to a single score. What are the existing
midpoint to damage factor? This is valid for
impact World Plus. For human health, we
first express them in DALY, disability-adjusted
life years. One main factor is
8.310 minus 7 here, which is the global warming
impact from 0-100 years. In addition to that, some of the gases will have
an odor effect like methane, and they have all their
effect in these 0-100 years. But some other like
CO_2, N_2O will also contribute for impact
after 100 years. That we see in fact, the impact after 100
years in our case for LT longer-term is about 2.5 higher than the impact in the first 100 years
in that case. We see that water use is contributing the
comparative toxic units on humans which were cases of cancer or
cases of lung cancer, 11.5 so the unit will
be here DALY per case. That will be cancer
or non-cancer here for the non-cancer
toxicity category. Then we have also some factor
for ionizing radiation. Respiratory inorganic, which
are the fine particulates, and respiratory organic or for toxin formation as so many
other people are calling it, ozone layer depletion. On the right-hand side, you have the impacts, the damage on the
ecosystem quality, and it's in potentially
disappeared fraction of species, potentially the PDF. Is it a fashion of species over its multiplication
over a certain area, unit area, and during a year? Why over and during? Because if some
substance, for example, will diffuse over
very large area and the persistent
over a longer time, their impact damage
will be also higher. Depends also to the extent of the damage is also important
to measure in that school. Again, we have a first 100
years score plus second, the longer-term over 100 year, which are also about
2.5 times higher. The third area of protection is this instrumental value and we have essentially so far
values which offer for sale. There are some interim value for mineral use and water
use in that case. Let's look and apply now for
the steel front-end panel. These data to calculate the damage from global warming and fine particulates
on human health. For the first 100 year, we have 258.1 kilo
CO_2 equivalent, which are multiply the 8.310
minus 7 DALY per kilo. We will get here 0.000214 DALY per
functional unit. You see again, we have the
kilo per functional unit, we divide DALY per kilo of the rest of substance and we get the DALY per
functional unit. We can do the same for the fine particulate impact
and we can sum them up. We find here 0.00113 DALY per functional unit or that could be 1.3, 10 minus 3 DALY per
functional unit. Let's remind this number. This is our steel
front-end panel, essentially driven in a sense by the global warming impact. Because in the other here
you have another 2.5, which is nearly 0.005 here, which is included in the 0.0088, which is coming from the global warming
higher than 100 years.