We've done that
for the steel now, and let's go and look
at the results for the four different types of material that we
are considering. What is the best material and what is the worst
material in our case? We see that, this time,
recycled aluminum, and we look here at the
damage on human health, all the category which are
contributing to human health. So all the units
here are the same DALY per functional unit, and these things could
be summed up apriori, but it's nice to display
them separately. When we look at that, we see that first the
recycled aluminum is usually the
smallest of the four. Except here we have a small
inversion with the composite. But apart from
that, it is better. The question to decide, and we could look here
on the steel side. This is also the highest, apart again for this
ionizing radiation category, where it is just below
the aluminum one. The question is, now, which impact category
are relevant? We have the privilege
now to have scaled them and put
them in the same units. First, to do that, we display everything
in log scale. Differences seem relatively
small between category, but you typically
have a factor 2 here between the steel and
the recycled aluminum. So it's still a
substantial difference. Now regarding the uncertainty, you want to be sure
to consider all the categories which
are still relevant, and relevant would
be the factor 100 typically from the
highest category effect, 100-1,000 uncertainty. But I would say factor 100, we start to be sure that
we are on the right side. Factor 100 here bring us about at this level. This mean what is below this level is irrelevant. The photochemical oxidants or respiratory inorganic
is irrelevant. Ionizing radiation where we have the tendency is irrelevant, and the ozone layer depletion for this case study
is irrelevant. It's not irrelevant in general, but for the present
case study, it is. What we see is, putting
in perspective, this magnitude is really
important based on natural science to give
the relative importance. For this case, the
global warming, the water use impact,
the fine particulate, carcinogen, and non-carcinogen
are the category which we should
relatively look at. In that case, we can
say the steel is the highest and the
recycled aluminum is the best composite
aluminum having mixed results depending on
the impact category. Last point on this graph,
which is interesting, these are these
error bar up there. You see that these upper error
bar goes to 110 minus 3, but we are about at 0.110
minus 3 when we don't consider the impact
occurring after 100 years. The top of the error
bar represents the impact over the
entire duration of the considered impact, which is typically 1,000 year
considered in that case, where the top of
the bar themselves are 0-100 years in time. I think this is a much
smarter way to represent the time horizontally in an LCA study than
choosing a time horizontal from 100 years and forgetting everything
which happens afterwards. Here, instead of saying
we stop at 100 year and we don't care about the
future generation after that, we say, okay, let's display
separately and show impact from 0-100 and
impact after 100 years. We could put and present as many category as we are
interested in this case. This was for human health. Let's show now the results and similar results for
the ecosystem damage. Again, we see that,
in most category, steel is the highest and recycled aluminum
is the lowest. We only have here
for the water use some mixed results
and some inversion. Again, we can ask how
relevant is the water use. We can look and we say, if we take two orders of
magnitude from the tops here, that we want two
order magnitude, probably anything
which is below that is not really relevant. Here we would have a sort
of debate on the water use and scrutinize a bit more
whether it is relevant. But for the most and
the highest impact, we see that the ranking
is very stable. We get that. We get the same ranking
if we consider 100 years. These one are also
very consistent. These one are also
very consistent. The only one where we should
really look at is for water which behave
often a bit slightly different than the
other categories. To finish with damage
characterization, so far we have calculated
our damage based on the midpoint score and using these MDF is midpoint
to damage factor. Now we could also impact well because that in fact directly calculated from the
inventory flow U_i by considering that the midpoint itself is the midpoint
characterization factor time my inventory emission, and we sum up over all
the inventory flow corresponding to this
midpoint category. Instead of doing
the grouping here, we could also in fact
do the grouping as such here and directly represent here a damage characterization
factor that we put here, that we multiply the
emission flow by two. We take the MDF and the CF
midpoint to get the damage. By definition, this characterization factor
will be the MDF time, the CF at midpoint. We get also a direct
calculation and score with a direct characterization
factor at damage level. You must always care when
you use some other factor. Are they directly
at damage level? Are they just for the midpoint? We need to look at that. In summary here, if we look
at the different factor, we can have either the damage
characterization factor, which is in the unit
of your damage like the DALY per kilo_i
or here we had a kilo reference
substance per kilo_i, whereas the MDF makes a link between the two in having the damage unit per kilo
reference substance. Summary, the
characterization factors for both midpoint
and damage levels are derived from environmentally relevant
characterization of the cause-effect chain from
inventory flow to impact. This means that we don't have here social
preferences included. There are some value choices
when you choose the DALY, but this is a choice
which is taken by World Health Organization,
endorsed by a lot of people. But then to determine
best estimate of DALY, this is all based
on natural science. However, these damage score, we have presented them on log scale to account for the often large uncertainty of the midpoint
to damage factor. It's especially true
for the climate change, and we are revising
partly this factor. For the time horizon, it is interesting to separate damage for the first 100 years from damages after 100 years, rather than arbitrary fixing
and discounting anything suddenly from a
fixed time horizon of 100 years, for example. Damage on human health
can be compared between this damage
on ecosystem, or the midpoint
category contributing can be compared among them. But we cannot compare damage on human
health and ecosystem. They are not on the same unit, and there is no way we
can compare this number until we proceed to
the optional phases of the life cycle
impacts assessment, which are normalization
and weighting that we will see next.