We have more or less see that for front-end panel of our car, that the steel scenario
is the highest, the recycled
aluminum the lowest. But the question is, how relevant this type of impact compared to the
rest of our daily life? This is what normalization is
specifically interested in. Learning Objectives
of this section is to define what is
normalization in LCA. Apply normalization
to the damage score of our car case study, calculate and interpret these
normalization score and understand this is
important to what can and cannot be summed up. This is the fourth step
and it's an optional step, as we mentioned in the
different steps slide. Normalization, the idea is to compare the contribution of our service of a functional unit to the total effect
at global level, perhaps per person
because that would be a too high number two
tails total world effect. But the total effect
purpose and usually we do it at global level or for certain methods which
are continental, like for Europe or US for Tracy, it's at continental level. We have arrived
to a total damage or damages in different
impact category that we have here, and we want to put
them in perspective. What do we do? We take the total emission
per person per year. In fact, we run this
total emission at the entrance here of my
impact World plus methods, and I run it through and I get a total world damage
per person per year, a total ecosystem damage
per person per year, and a total world results
impacts in person per year. Then I can compare my total world damage per person per year and my
damage per functional unit. That's exactly the idea
of what we are doing. The definition is we analyze the respective share of
a functional unit to the overall worldwide
effects per person for each
area of protection, or the overall annual
worldwide effect per person. This comparison
between my scenario and the overall world impact
per person per year can be interpreted as the contribution
of the functional unit to the average annual
impact of a person on human health and ecosystem
or energy resources, and we do it separately
for the three because we get here separate calculation
and separate scores. So we are comparing each
of these separately, at least in the first stage. You have to be careful, give us a damage
oriented comparison, but it gives us an intuition of the magnitude of the impact of each scenario compared
to our total daily life. Let's look how we do that. To calculate my
total world damage in a certain area, as I say, I take my emission
contributing to each impact category and the total emission and I run
it through impact World. I go through my
different processes and I get a total world damage. How high is it? That's interesting to
see for human health. We get about here 0.0216 DALY per person per year. Is it high or low? Let's look over the entire
lifetime and we get here 1.86 DALY per person
over a lifetime. About two years lost
due to pollution. This is a realistic number. That's where we can start comparing to what's
happening in life. This is about what
the global burden of disease is attributed
to pollution here. For ecosystem quality, we
have less feeling of that, but we arrived to
about 8,500 PDF. Potentially disappeared
fraction of species over one square meter and the
year per person year. For the resources, we
arrive to 63,000 here, 100 mega-joule per
person per year, or $313 here per
person per year. Now we could also use and look, that's interesting
to see how many, with our
characterization factor, what is the relative
ratio between the 0.0216? I make it the ratio to
8,500 then I inverse that, I take the inverse of that. We can interpret the
inverse of this ratio that for every DALY of impact on
human health we generate, we also generate about
8,500 divided by 0.021. That's about 400,000 PDF square meter year of
impact on ecosystem. It doesn't mean this
is equal because it's just the present effect and how the present
effect equivalent, that's something we'll discuss in the next section I'm waiting. But it'd give us an
order of magnitude of our present impact in
different impact categories. Now how do we apply
that for a scenario? To calculate for given scenarios and normally the
normalized damage, we will take the damage on human health in DALY per
functional unit, for example. That was our 0.00113 DALY per functional unit that we had with accounting for all
different scenario, and we divide it by the world damage that
we have just seen, which is in DALY
per person year. When I divide, I put the
DALY down here person year. If we combine that, the DALY goes away and we get person year for our
functional unit. Somewhat strange. It's how much of the equivalent impact
of a person year per functional unit is this
functional unit responsible of. You could keep either group
things, total human health, or you could keep
each impact category, global warming on human health, water use on human health, cancer, non-cancer
separate, if you will. Let's see how we apply that for the total human damage
score, which was 0.0113. That was when we did the damaged part of
the impact assessment. When we want to calculate
the normalized damage score for human has for the steel
panel, what do we get? We get that the normalized
damage is equal here to 0.00113 DALY per functional unit divided by, what did we have, 0.0216. The unit of that, as we said are person year per DALY here. We get about 0.052, and what is the unit, DALY goes away, person year per functional unit. Interpretation. That means that this
front-end panel over 200,000 kilometer, which was mostly dominated
by the 80-liter gasoline in the case of the steel
pylon or about 40 gallon of gasoline is corresponding
to 5.2 percent of the total impact generated by an average person or the average of all
person in the world. 5.2 percent sounds high for just a piece of a car like that. But we have to realize
that we are in the US and the pollution from a
US citizen is far higher, in fact than its
share in the world. We have to keep
that in mind when we take it as a reference, the average consumption
or impacts in the world.