So we've learned how to normalize that and we can now apply that
once we clarified our calculation to our different scenarios and first I keep my different
area of protection. Here we have human health
okay from here until here and then here we have
the ecosystem quality and we finalize here with the natural
resources with express his in primary energy so all the years. So when we look at the scenarios,
let's start to put them a bit in perspective we find back
between scenario that the damage characterization which is very
important to perform first. Because otherwise we would
have very similar results between these different
impact categories so that the importance of the damage
characterization is that we can differentiate this
impact category from the other. And now from the normalized value we see that the way the normalization
factor are done. We get in fact slightly higher
proportionally impact for global warming on human health than for global warming on ecosystem
quality which has other category. Which are contributing substantially
not so much from for a front end panel, but from agriculture in a sense,
not that surprising in this case. Okay so now question is what about
summing all this impact after all. Now we have the same unit
previously we had dolly and PDF square meter yard and
dollar or mega jewel. So now we have the same units. Can we submit it? The answer is having the same
unit is a necessary condition to some different quantity up,
but not a sufficient condition. And in fact a priori you should keep the
human health, the ecosystem quality and the natural resources has
three different impact score. Okay, and we'll discuss on the next slide, what do we imply if we start summing
them up across area of protection? Okay, we see also that we
have the results after 100 years which are still
substantial adding up here. So if we now we group within human health, you see that about half of
the impact in human health and a bit more than half
are due to global warming. That's what we have here like that, second read the after 100 years matter. Okay, this is after 100 years. That's a factor about 1.5 compared
to the impact over the first years. And we find really in
the three area of protection, the same ranking nearly where steel and recycled aluminum are high and
low and the composite and the aluminum are pretty
intermediary in the middle. So if you would start to sum
up these different ratios, you would assume in fact
that the total effect for human health would be equivalent
to the total effect on equity, ecosystems, quality. Which be equivalent to the total effect on
energy and resources or natural resources. Is that true? Nothing tell us that the present
effect is equivalent. Okay, so to do better. That's where it's interesting
to move to the next step, which will be in the next section of
this presentation which is on waiting. So summary for the normalization
normalization compared the impact score. Perfection we need to the total
world impact per inhabitant of the corresponding impact category. It's really putting
the score of my scenario in perspective to our overall activity. Normalized score can only be summed
up within each area of protection. They cannot be some up across area
of protection unless you accept or you assume that the total world
impact are considered equivalent between the different area of
protection or damaged categories. The Life Cycle Initiative developed
default consistent normalization factor at midpoint and damage level. But I highly recommend that we
apply it at damage level here and it's recommended that
therefore to first perform the midpoint to damage
assessment before normalizing. And we've seen that in our example
because that will in a sense get rid of certain category which don't really
come high in the the overall impact