Last but not least, could we eventually
bring everything on the same scale that we arrive to an overall impact which
combined now the impacts of my impact on human health, and my impact on ecosystem
and natural resources and bring them on
the same level. Of course, we don't necessarily need to arrive to a single
score, as I was saying, but why not make all these
different impacts really comparable and that we can
not sum them by group, but look at them across the empire type of
environmental impact. This is a role of weighting. Learning objective, define
what is weighting in LCA, provide guidelines
for good practice in determining weighting factor, apply the weighting to the damage scores
of car case study, and determine and interpret
these weighted impact score. Again, we want to
understand what can and cannot be summed up. This is the fifth
also optional step of my impact assessment. This time, we are
going to look at how much value we will attribute to each of
the different damage. We would like to know what other people are willing
to pay per DALY, disability adjusted life
years, for example. What donor people attribute to PDF square meter a year. Once we know that, we can multiply the DALY per functional unit by this dollar per DALY and we will get a
total damage human health, expressing dollar
per functional unit, total damage in ecosystem and expressed in dollar per
functional unit and resources. Then we could even
this time we can sum them up all the way through
or we keep them separate, but we can put them on the
same scale and really compare them across all the pot. Impact World Plus doesn't have an official weight so far, but there is another
method from Weidema et al. 2009 which enabled to do that and that's what
we are going to use here. There are different ways
to wait and approach. The first point is, these are based
on social values. It's not anymore
natural science-based, because how much is
worth a DALY or a human life versus how
much is worth species, this is not something we
can find in nature itself. This is something that
we have to decide as a society what we think is due and there are different methods
to try to measure them. First method is monetary method, and there are a
lot of different. It's not because you get a price like the cost on the hospital or
things like that. You have to be careful
what you compare. The methods which are using LCA are usually based
on willingness to pay. This is how much people
are ready to pay to live one more year in
good health, for example. Or how much people would say if they are presenting
an alternative, would prefer one to the other, one being avoiding
the species deaths versus some human health or versus having some
more resources. With this, we can
start transforming impact in costs that
just what we see. You have other methods which are involving expert panel
or interest group, where you ask them, what do you think
is more important? Finally, you have
distance to target, where you compare
your own scenario to some more global or national, usually political
objectives that you can do. All these weighting method, the way to say the problem
is crucial and that's a limitation of ISO presently that it does not
provide much guidance. It just mentioned then, but we should re-introduce
some principle. First-principle from
my point of view is we should first arrive
to a damage level. Because if we start weighting directly pollutant quantity
or amount of [inaudible] , I saw to equivalent. Nobody has a good
sense of what it means and what is the effect. First thing first, we should do everything we can
based on natural science. To arrive to a given damage, a DALY is something we
understand what it means, and in that sense, this is much easier for
people to evaluate. The second is, you
should not ask, is global warming more
important than acidification? You should say, always
define the absolute value of related to global warming versus the absolute value
for acidification. You need to provide the panel a level at which
you evaluate the comparison. It's not necessarily
the level you have in your case study because here nobody has a good sense of that. You need something
which is a bit beyond. We need to provide
the panel member with explicit references
they can relate to. The total world impact is not a bad one because we have
some sense in our world, though it's also mediated via what we receive
as information. But we have a better sense of the total impact than the impact of my
front-end panel itself. We can invite the
panel member or to weight normalize
score in that sense. Not the raw score, but once you have
normalized them, implicitly normalizing in fact, you are saying, if I
gave twice more now, I'm giving twice more
to the global impact, in that case for this
category than the other. Let's take now the
monetary method and see how weighted damage
score can be calculated. What we need is attribute
a value to my DALY. This factor, which is
my weighted factor, would be here the cost
or willingness to pay to avoid one unit damage, and derived from
budget constraint. That's where my colleague, by Weidema and our
Japanese colleagues, so Itsudo et al, have done a very good job
to look at these analysis, where they give people a certain budget and they can decide what they do in priority. Under this constraint, we can design a price
for the dollar, for the PDF square meter year. We'll see in a minute. We then multiply that by
the DALY professional unit. We had our 0.01100113, which was our DALY
per functional unit. That's what we multiply
our DALY per dollar to arrive to a dollar
per functional unit. Values. Stepwise method from Weidema 2009 gives us a value. Here we are in Euros and we're not that far in
front a dollar presently, so €74,000 per DALY, 0.14 for one PDF
square meter year. For the resource is
€0.0043 per mega joule. Or if we have our
resulting dollar here, we can just use the currency that's moving
with time, of course. One DALY on human health here. If I do the ratio between these two numbers here and here, 74,000 over 0.14, we get
in fact that one DALY on human health is equivalent to 530,000 PDF square meter year. It's interesting. We had
seen that for the impact, the ratio is about one
to 400,000 year for the willingness to pay
what was observed with people is we arrive to
something a bit similar. That's probably because the
question was relatively well set in advance. To get our total human score, we weighted how we
get our price of €74,000 per DALY time. My DALY score,
0.00113 coming from part B of our chapter
or present section. We get here, DALY
are getting away. We have euro per functional
unit in our case. That's about €84 per
functional unit. Is that much or not? We can think a bit. The price of a front-end panel must not be that far
from this number. It's not a negligible,
I would say, additional cost that
are represented here. When we look in addition
to paying our car, we have indirect
costs, external costs, or they call them,
which we should also start considering when we
compare different impacts.