Now we have these two bulbs, and it's great to have
the fluorescent bulb because we have reduced
our consumption. What could be the
problem with it? Problem could be this one
needs a bit more time, so what I did when we
were using this one, now I've moved to LED, but when I was using that, I was using slightly
higher intensity so that when I switch it on, my wife will not complain, and we will directly get the
good light in that case. Second problems on this, remember this was especially when it appeared in the 1990s, this was substantially
more expensive. The service here
more expensive with the fluorescent or
nowadays the LED, then with an incandescent
bulb, let's look at that. To look at that, it's
not anymore LCA, we're going out of a
life cycle assessment, we are starting to do
life cycle costing. And the beauty is
that reference flow was what is needed to be purchased to ensure
the function. So this is also the basis, the same reference flow can be used to do a life cycle costing, adding as an information
the price of my purchase in addition to the
quantity we have already determined in
the reference flows. Let's try to do it together. We have here our 300 kilowatt-hour
per functional unit, which was the electricity use. Price of electricity, we could say here, $0.1 or 10 cent
per kilowatt-hour. Here we would have a total of $30 consume over five
years in our case. Let's compare here, and we have 65 kilowatt-hour times
$0.1 per kilowatt-hour. Over these five years, we only have $6.5 here, that's a substantial difference, we've saved here about $23.5. Now, if we take our bulb, first we needed five bulb here, so we need five times, I assume they are
like 50 cent each, that's $2.5 for the bulbs. Whereas with the incandescent, the fluorescents, I
will use only one here. So even the bulb themselves
in this hypothesis is in fact cheaper with the fluorescent
than incandescent. If we move it
further to the LED, which should last even
longer if they are of reasonable quality
than the incandescent, will also not really increase substantially as the price of
the purchase at the start. Now we have $30 doing for
the electricity $2.5, we get $32.5 here,
and here $8.5. We saved a substantial amount of money in these difference. Making it efficient, in fact, make us here in a
win-win situation, which is very interesting
because we saving both for the environment related to electricity consumption
and also money, which is also related to the
same energy consumption. Life cycle costing
can be made on a similar basis
combining the quantity, obtaining the LCA with
the price to get that. But as I said, this is not anymore LCA, we were not going to study
that in detail in the future. Let's look a bit at these
key parameter we've seen, and the first is a
light efficiency here in lumen per watt on this graph. You see the low efficiency
of the incandescent bulb, which are down here, and the fluorescent bulb already better in terms of
efficiency in that case. You have light which have even higher efficiency like
sodium lamps in the past, which were used in the streets. Nowadays it's interesting
that was when I studied or finished my study I was doing my PhD
between '83 and '88, we didn't have LED. LED came really at
the end of the '90s, I remember buying an
LED for my class, but the light used was really a perhaps 100 lumen instead
of 800 at that time. But now we see that
if I look here at the electrical consumption
for a given flow, if I put my 800 lumen
here that we have, we have this reduction, substantial reduction for incandescent to the fluorescent. Small increase, but
still important increase from the fluorescence
to the LED, but less gain than what we have had in the previous stage. Also technological
improvement needs time. We see that compared
to a candle. This is a log scale which
was 0.1 percent efficiency. Here we are now with the LEDs rather close to
the 50 percent efficiency, so much better and
that's the reason why now inside the house it's really interesting to change all
your bulb to LED because in fact you're paying electricity
at a much higher level, so when you move, just change all the bulb
that's cost-effective and that's good for
the environment that you want to do that. This change has
made time we needed 150 years to reach the
level we have with LED. The same with motor
engine efficiency have increased with time, but have increased
relatively slowly between the first steam engine and the gas turbine that
we start having here with high efficiencies. If we summarize our
different results, the functional unit
is the common unit representing the
function of the system. It's not something we purchased, it's representing the
offered service and it will provide the basis for
scenario comparison. All inventory emission will be calculated per functional unit. The functional unit is the
same for all scenarios. It is quantified value. It's an additive value in the sense if I double
the functional unit, it should double my emission, so functional unit
is not a ratio, so if you use a unit you're
taking is something per hour or something per another metric. This will not work
because it's not an additive metric in that case. If you study the components of, for example a plane engine from a larger product
which will be my plane. Functional unit
refer generally to the overall function for the consumer and
this is the plane, so this will be, we need even if we are
studying the reactor, we need to put it in
its context where this object become useful and
offer really its service. The plane engine is offering
some service for the plane, but it's useless unless
the plane is flying and really providing to the
consumer a given service. You can arbitrarily
select the amount of fractional unit you fix as
a reference for comparison. This is your choice, just take a convenient one which
speaks to people for that, but be careful as the example
we had here with the lumen, when what you need
to buy per functional unit changes as a
service duration. My electricity consumption
is changing as my service is lasting longer and the amount of service is
doubling with time. You need to make the
service duration explicit in the functional
unit and beware. That will be not per hour. That will be like we
had 800 lumen during, and that will be expressed by during and during is expressed by multiplication not division. We don't want and I say it's
not a ratio in that case. Some functional unit already
implicitly account for the duration of the service
like one kilowatt-hour. In fact it's already
multiply by an hour. It's one kilowatt during
an hour in that case. If I would compare different electricity
mix, for example. That was the functional unit, so now let's look at the corresponding
reference flows and environmental parameter. The reference flow
is what you buy, and it provide for
each scenario, and that's different
specific for each scenario. It differs here
for each scenario, the quantity needed
per functional unit. Don't put too many things, don't in your reference
flow put the aluminum needed because you don't buy the aluminum independently
of the bulb, you buy a bulb, so think
what am I purchasing, what am I buying to
get my service and put the fraction of what I'm
buying and remember, with a fixture it could be less than one that
you have depending on the functional
unit that you have chosen and it needs
to be quantified, it's not glass or it's not bulb. It's how many bulbs
per functional unit. . The key parameters for the
environmental optimization are multiplicative
factors that relate the functional unit to
the reference flow. It's which parameter is
making what I need to purchase high and they may be directly proportional
to this factor. The product lifetime
might be important. The number of reuses might
be important because if you can reuse the number
of use is increasing, you need less purchase in that case, and
the consumption, which is linked to the
efficiency that we have seen here with our
different types of bulb.