Welcome back. Today we're going to have an introduction
to life cycle impact assessment. Our learning objectives for today
are going to be to connect the life cycle inventory to its impacts by defining this
life cycle impact assessment phase of LCA. And in doing so we're going to think about the complex challenges in
addressing some of these impacts. So in LCA, we work hard to get a detailed
list of the emissions and resources. And then we want to think about, how do we connect those to the impacts
on human and environmental health? So in terms of our sustainable development
goal categories, where we have for example responsible consumption and production or
sustainable cities and communities. We want to figure out how does that
impact these other sustainable development goal categories including
good health and well being. Clean water and sanitation,
climate action, life below water and life on land. This is the third and
last phase of a life cycle assessment. So we started with a goal and scope
definition, defining functional units system boundaries,
figuring out the things we're comparing. Then we moved on to
the inventory of extractions and emissions associated with each scenario. What's the energy used? What's the pollution that's
coming into our air and water? And now we move to that last step,
what are the impacts of that inventory? And of course throughout a key
point is interpretation. The four categories of environmental
damage or impact that we focus on here are generally global impacts
that affect the entire world. Human health impacts which
affect humans in general. Ecosystem and biodiversity impact which
affect land, water, soil and species. And then resource use, which is thinking
about the water and land that's used and other resources, minerals as well. So one way to understand these is to
categorize some common environmental health impacts into these categories. So when we're talking about air pollution, we're usually talking about
human health impact categories. When we're thinking about climate change,
that's a global impact that can lead to increased temperatures and
extreme weather around the world. When we're looking at
species becoming extinct, that would fall in
the biodiversity category. When we talk about polluted water
that's related to resource use, but it also is connected to the human health
category of drinking water and food and of course to ecosystem health. And when we look at things like ocean
acidification and sea level rise that can result from climate change, those are also
impacts that happen around the world. And finally whenever we're focusing
on things like use of freshwater, that's a resource use category
that we're focusing on. One thing in life cycle impact assessment
is to think about the balance of the impacts that helps us think about the
balance between using the environment for what humans need versus
misusing the environment. And one example of this would be in
the US Dust Bowl in the 1930s and what happened there was after a period in
the twenties of relatively good rainfall. A lot of farmers in the Great Plains
decided to farm more intensively use deep
plowing techniques and new New developments in machinery
to farm relatively intensively. And so what that did is remove
the native grasses that normally trapped the soil during times
of drought and high winds. And so sure enough in 1930, when a drought
did come, the soil was no longer anchored. And that honor unanchored
soil turned into dust and then the high winds that came blew,
that dust high into the air and blackened the sky and
reached as far as New York City. This was happening throughout
the 1930s and unfortunately, it only intensified the economic impact
of the Great Depression that was already hitting the United States. And so it ended up leaving more
than 500,000 Americans homeless and many who died of dust pneumonia or
malnutrition. And so with things like life
cycle impact assessment, we want to think about the potential
impacts of what we're doing to our environment and how it might impact
people further on and all around. So, in considering impacts, we're facing new challenges
since the dust wall happened. New challenges in the magnitude of
these impacts because of technology and economic development,
we've accelerated and amplified the magnitude of
our footprint and impacts. And this is happening in multiple ways. It's happening in our spatial scale
where globalization distances impacts from the consumer,
from where those impacts occur. So when I consume something, I may not see any direct feedback
of the impact it's having. This also is challenging because with
globalization we require a global response and that makes governance
a challenge when trying to limit anything on a global scale. Another new challenge we're facing
is with the temporal scale. So our current actions may only have
visible impacts decades from now and so that makes it very hard to help
populations limit their actions based on future impacts that they
can't yet see or don't know. And this is all related to more
complex cause-effect chains. These are not always visible and so it's
crucial to use science and technology for diagnostics and to prevent irreversible
impacts that may happen far away in both time and space but
that can still critically impact others. Because as a reminder from before
we do not inherit the earth from our ancestors,
we borrow it from our children. So a summary of this video is the life
cycle impact assessment phase of LCA. Is how we connect that life cycle
inventory of the scenarios we're comparing to the ultimate impacts on
environmental and human health. That's the ultimate
question we want to answer. And because of global interconnectedness
and accelerating development of technology, it's increasingly
challenging to recognize and allocate the impacts of individual and
collective actions