Hi, everybody. In today's video, we're going to have an
overview of some of the most common environmental
impact categories for our life cycle
impact assessment. I have to say this
is one of the things that really got me into LCA is realizing that I could
connect the decisions I make with the impacts on humans, on the environment, on animals, in general, be able
to compare those two. Our learning objectives
for today are to first list the four main environmental
damage categories, then we're going to relate specific environmental
and health impacts to each of these categories, and then for a few, we're going to dive deeper
into the mechanisms and the spatial and temporal ranges of some of the dominant impacts. As a reminder, in our phases
of life cycle assessment, we've already talked
about the goal and scope definition
where we did functional units and our different scenarios
and system boundaries. Then we use the inventory of
extractions and emissions to compare the two scenarios and what extractions and emissions
are associated with each. Then in order to make
that information meaningful and useful, we take it the next
step to look at the impacts of those
extractions and emissions. Throughout, of
course, we are doing interpretation to make sure that what we're doing
is making sense, is consistent, and we don't need to revise
anything along the way. The four categories of
environmental damage, we've got global impacts, things like climate change, human health impacts, so these are things that cause death or disease to people. Ecosystem and
biodiversity impacts, so things that affect endangered
species, for example, or the habitats that they
live in, and resource use, things like water use, land use, use of minerals
or non-renewable energy. We'll start with global impacts and we'll look at this through a concept defined by scientists
as planetary boundaries. Now, planetary boundaries, what they do is
they characterize safe operating
space for humanity. Scientists define these
as things where if you transgress one or more
planetary boundary, this may be catastrophic
by triggering nonlinear responses of the continental or
planetary scale. In 2015, in a science
advances paper, scientists characterize
the state of seven out of the nine
planetary boundaries. We'll start by focusing
on climate change, which is right here at the top. We can already see, it's already out of the green safe boundary and into the zone of uncertainty
or increasing risk. The mechanism for climate change is the greenhouse effect. What happens here
is that the sun shines down on the Earth and so sends energy, and light, and heat into the Earth, and then the Earth's surface
absorbs that and re-emits that back as long wave
or heat radiation. It's a different
form of radiation, which means that
greenhouse gases in the atmosphere absorb
that and then they, in turn, re-emit it. Some of it goes out
into space and some of it goes back to the
Earth's surface. This is generally
useful for us and lets us be alive because those greenhouse gases
keep the surface of the Earth warm enough for us
to function, which we like. But as we can see
in recent time, there have been much higher
anthropogenic CO_2 emissions and so that is leading to a warming of the Earth's
atmosphere that is much higher than many of us can
adapt to in many ways. Impacts to date first on
just the temperature, we can look at the
global warming relative to a time
period before we had omitted so much CO_2 and other greenhouse
gases into the atmosphere. Compared to that time
period of 1850-1900, we can see that, at first, there were just the
normal oscillations, right around the 1960s, there were just the normal
temperature oscillations, but then we can see a
clear trend upward. Those oscillations continued but the average moved upward. Something to notice here
is that the model or estimated anthropogenic
warming is tracking well with the observed monthly global
mean surface temperature, the observed averages
are matching modeled averages based on climate change in the
mechanism that I explained. In terms of long-term impacts
on this temporal scale. These could be variable, so it depends how
humans respond, and has large uncertainties due to the complex system
of the atmosphere. If there's no reduction, we're likely to exceed this
threshold right here of 1.5 degrees of warming and
could even reach two degrees. But with faster CO_2
reductions were likely to stay below 1.5 degrees
of warming and we can see that we might
bring us back down. What are the causes
of climate change? Well, like I said, we believe it's
greenhouse gases, and the reason that
scientists have confidence in that is because the observed warming matches the combined
anthropogenic forcing. Forcing is another word for the effect of our emissions on the temperature
that's observed. The observed warming
globally we can see is a little bit more
than half a degree Celsius, that's this black bar, and greenhouse gases, actually, through our models are
predicted to lead to a greater increase in
temperature than is observed. But the reason for
that is that we also, as humans, emit other particles and pollutants and emissions
into the atmosphere, and so those forcings actually end up cooling
the atmosphere, and when we add the green
bar and the yellow bar, we get our combined
anthropogenic forcings, which is matching our
observed warming. Something else to
note here is that the natural forcings due
to solar oscillations or any other aspects of
our orbit are much smaller compared to the observed warming and
the predicted warming. In terms of thinking
of the climate change impacts so far, it can be hard to attribute any given impact of climate change because of
the probabilities involved. But in recent decades, scientists have been
publishing studies that directly can link
climate change to specific impacts and they've
connected climate change to impacts on every single
continent in the world. That's what this is showing us. These impacts are happening
all over the world and they're connecting
all types of impacts. In blue, we've got impacts
on physical systems, such as glaciers or
coastal erosion. In green, we've got our
biological systems, so things like wildfire
and marine ecosystems. Then in red, we've got
human and managed systems, so things like food production or livestock or
health and economies. You can see blue, green,
and red throughout. If you want to dig
deeper into this, you can also see the confidence
range for all of these. You can see relatively
high confidence that climate change is impacting every continent and
the many systems that we use in living. What about future risks? These depend on the future of our greenhouse gas emissions. I'm going to go
through this figure backwards a little bit, starting at Panel C. At Panel C, we can see that our
baseline emissions are in gray at the top-right, that's how much
were predicted to emit in greenhouse gases
if there's no change. But there are
different scenarios that are in the IPCC report, all of which would lead
to varying levels of reduced greenhouse
gas emissions, and so what the
rest of this figure does is look at those different scenarios
and their impacts. In Panel B, what we
can see is that if we are able to reduce our
greenhouse gas emissions, then that would reduce the cumulative
emissions over time. It would go from around 8,000 gigatons of CO_2 down to 6,000, 4,000, or 3,000
gigatons of CO_2. Then on the vertical
axis of Panel B, we can see what that
would mean in terms of the global mean
temperature change. If we make no change, 8,000 would correspond to 4-5
degrees Celsius increase. But as we reduce our
cumulative CO_2 emissions, that would reduce the global
mean temperature change. Then finally, we can
link this to Panel A, the risks from climate change because these are dependent
on the temperature change. What we can see is
that for things like unique and threatened ecosystems or for extreme weather events, even at 1.5-2 degrees Celsius, which we were already
pretty much at, we're experiencing very high
risk due to climate change. But for things like the
distribution of impacts, the global aggregate impacts, or large-scale singular events, if we can keep our
temperature change down, then we can reduce
the risk level, the additional risk for
any of those things.