How do we treat this? How do we treat this
issue of climate change? The main thing is to reduce
greenhouse gas emissions. What we're seeing here is that in the lighter
version of each color, we would have the
direct CO_2 emissions for different sectors. If there were no mitigation. We can see for transport, there would be a steadily
increasing CO_2 emissions, for buildings as well. Definitely for industry
and electricity, we also see this trend in increasing CO_2 emissions
associated with those. Now AFOLU here stands for the
net effect of agriculture, forestry, and other land use. Then there's also non CO_2 greenhouse gas
emissions that are coming. But if we have various
mitigation scenarios, those are the darker
version of each color, we can see how we can
reduce the CO_2 emissions. One of the main ones we can
do is for our electricity. Key measures to achieve such mitigation goals
include decarbonizing, so reducing the carbon intensity of electricity generation, as well as efficiency
enhancements and behavioral changes. In order to reduce
our energy demand compared to our baseline. Another thing to think about
in terms of the treatment of this climate change issue is addressing CO_2
emissions fairly. Not just lumping by country and asking different
countries to meet targets, but recognizing our per
capita contributions. In this figure, we can see that the United States and China have similar size areas
on this figure. Which means that they are both contributing similar
size CO_2 emissions. But because the horizontal axis is their annual emissions, and the vertical axis is
the per capita emissions. We can see that, the
US is emitting per person double the CO_2
compared to China. We want to be able to
take that into account when making global plans
about CO_2 emissions. That's one example of global
impact climate change, and it's one we're
struggling with. I also want to focus on a different global impact
or ozone depletion. We can see in our planetary
boundaries figure, that this is one where
we are safely still in the safe or green zone for our stratospheric
ozone depletion. We'll look into
why that might be. The diagnosis about
ozone depletion is that in the 1970s and '80s, a lot of things called CFCs or chlorofluorocarbons
were being emitted as part of industrial processes. What would happen is that the chlorine would get removed, once it's in the atmosphere,
get removed from the CFC, and it was then able to
break down the ozone high in our atmosphere by reacting
with the O_3 ozone molecules, separating off an O. Then the chlorine
could get free and do it again and again and again. Even a small amount of
chlorine could lead to a huge depletion in ozone
in our stratosphere. One CFC could break down
100,000 molecules of ozone. The problem with
this is that the sun has different types of rays
that can do damage to us, and the ozone layer
was blocking some of these critical UV rays from impacting human
and plant health. We were able to measure
this happening. This graph is showing the
minimum levels of ozone over Antarctica
through the year 2015. The lower the
minimum levels are, the more exposed plants and animals are to the
harmful UV radiation. Now we can see a clear
drastic decrease in the minimum ozone, which is bad, but then
they flattened out. The ozone was no longer
decreasing, and so we went up. How did that happen? Here's a little timeline. The key thing is the diagnosis
came before the symptoms. In 1920s, a scientist
named Dobson was studying stratospheric
ozone, and in 1974, an article in nature already
characterized this mechanism of CFCs migrating into the stratosphere and
releasing chlorine. In 1985, the British
Antarctic Survey team had been measuring the ozone
layer already for 18 years, and they saw the first
visible evidence that the ozone layer
was depleting. It was depleted so much they
actually didn't believe their data until a second
set of data confirmed it. Then relatively quickly in 1987, the Montreal Protocol
on Substances That Deplete the Ozone
Layer is signed. It became a legally
binding protocol between 24 countries to
reduce CFC emissions. Kofi Annan, the former Secretary General of
the United Nations, said about this, "Perhaps the single most successful
international agreement to date has been the
Montreal Protocol." That that led to a freeze in the production
and consumption of CFCs, and it was a success story. Industrialized countries in
1986 had a huge amount of ozone depleting
potential each year that they were emitting, and that steadily reduced to a point where we're no longer worried about
the ozone layer. That was a little bit about
the global impacts category. Now we're going to talk about
some human health impacts. One of the dominant
human health impacts is ambient air pollution. We can see that on this
figure from the Lancet, which is outlining the
attributable dailies per year, so disability adjusted
life years per year for different things that
impact human health. The biggest one is dietary
risks and inactivity, which we spent a
lot of time talking about already related
to food and diet. But the next two
biggest ones are household air pollution and ambient particulate matter,
outdoor air pollution. Those have a huge
impact on human health. Other things that impacted
our human toxicity, including indoor
toxicity of chemicals, photochemical ozone. We'll talk a little bit more
about ionizing radiation, noise, occupational
risks and injuries. One of those dominant things is the human health impacts due to primary and secondary
particulate matter, and this is something
that I focused on a lot in my research. It leads to 3.2 million
deaths per year, 65% of which actually
occur in Asia, which is not at all necessary, the country that's
inducing the PM emissions. What happens is something called reactive oxidants stress, which leads to cardiovascular
and pulmonary diseases, lung cancer, lower respiratory
infections, and stroke. The US alone is responsible
for 86,000 deaths per year, 85% of which are
cardiovascular diseases. Another human health impact other than particulate matter is that due to photochemical
oxidation from NOx and VOCs. NOx is formed when nitrogen
and oxygen that are already in the air react together under
high temperatures, such as in the exhaust of
fossil fuel-burning engines, and that creates NOx. NOx can then react with volatile organic
compounds or VOCs, which can be emitted
by gasoline as an antigen pyrogenic source or biogenic sources like trees. When sunlight plus NOx plus
VOCs react, they form ozone. But in this case, the ozone is close to
where we are rather than far up above blocking the sun and it actually has
negative effects on us, on respiratory
effects for humans or decreased reduction
in plant productivity. Those were some examples of human health impacts
associated with emissions. Now we'll talk a
little bit about ecosystem and
biodiversity impacts. The main example
will give here is the Lake Erie toxic algae bloom. This happens when rainfall washes fertilizer
and manure that we emit into the environment from these large farm fields into streams that all
flow into Lake Erie. This fertilizer
causes huge amounts of algae to grow each year, which can make water
toxic to fish, wildlife, and people. As an example, in July 2019, a severe bloom of
blue-green algae began spreading across the
western half of Lake Erie. The dominant organism in
there was a bacteria that produces a toxin which
can cause liver damage, numbness, dizziness,
and vomiting. That's an example of how
our emissions can cause ecosystem impacts that can
also impact human health. Now we'll cover the last
category of resource use. This can include water use, such as freshwater
biodiversity loss, or global water crisis that leads to food
security issues. Land use, which
can be related to habitat change as a major driver of terrestrial
biodiversity loss. Biotic depletion, such as overfishing
and marine ecosystems. Or energy resources, that's a functional impact
where the renewal rate of an energy source
is vastly exceeded and that's why we call
it non-renewable energy. Here's an example
of how water use can affect humans
and ecosystems. Water use decreases
the availability and leads to
competition for water. For human users that don't
have any adaptation, there are direct
human health impacts associated with
lesser, dirtier water. But many adaptations also
decrease water availability to have indirect impacts on human health resources
and ecosystem. For ecosystems, they
get limited water. There are, of course, impacts
on ecosystem quality, both direct and indirect. The summary of all this is that the main diagnoses of these global impact
categories that we're talking about are the
increasing consumption in developed nations is leading to pollution and usage of
non-renewable resources. The negative impacts that are occurring are unequally
affecting off in developing nations through irreversible use of
natural resources, decreasing water quality, or climate change or
particulate matter. It's good to realize
that the scale of these impacts can
range from very local to global and from immediate impacts to those
that take decades to manifest. A key thing here is just to think globally and act locally, and use LCA to help make our actions more
effective. Thank you.