Welcome back, today we're going to dive
deeper into the framework of life cycle impact assessment, or LCIA. So our learning objectives for today, are to describe the challenges that we
have with combining different indicators. And being able to compare them,
to find the key vocabulary for life cycle impact assessment. Especially focusing on this idea
of midpoint impact categories, and endpoint damage categories. And really recognize that the uncertainty
of impacts depends on interpretation uncertainty and model uncertainty. Which are often inversely related. So, let's say that we want to calculate
the impact of University of Michigan by combining some key numbers. Well it was founded in 1817, and
has more than 64,000 students, and the stadium capacity
is 106,000 students. Wow, these are all really big numbers so
let's get the total impact by just adding up all three and
we get a whopping 172,000. But of course in calculating this,
this doesn't make any sense, those numbers shouldn't be added,
even if all of them are big. We can't compare U of M to UCLA,
by looking at this number 170,000 and seeing which one's better or
more impactful. So but what happens is actually
in calculating impacts for impact assessment of different decisions. Many approaches end up looking for a
single final number to compare two things. And they end up adding things that
don't necessarily make sense. So in impact assessment, our goal is to convert things as
much to common units as possible. And add up those units, so
that they can be added and then compared to other scenarios. Now you've actually already seen
an example of different impact assessment approaches. When Professor Julier presented
the comparison of packaging materials. Where different approaches caused
different emissions to be weighted differently. He was showing you different
impact assessment methods. And what we can see in these
results is that even there it looks like different emissions
we get different results. We don't get the same results for
different impact assessment methods. And so even with a more formal
impact assessment method, different results can happen and
that can reveal a potential for bias. And this is why sometimes when such
impacts are calculated, folks might say, well show me your results, and
I'll just tell you who paid you. I'll tell you who sponsored this work, in order to get results
that make them look better. That's understandable that people are
suspicious of those results because they think it could be skewed
to support the sponsors. So to be more scientific, and
to yield more robust results, we need more recognized and
consistent impact assessment methods. Especially it turns out for toxicity
assessment, without a formal assessment, we all end up adding implicit and
unscientific weightings. So we want to be explicit with
the assumptions we're making. So let's say that we have the question of
how do we compare elephants and apples? Again it depends on your functional unit, like what's the thing you're
comparing them based on. If it's based on having to transport
them and impacts from transport, you care about their weight of course. But if you cared about the caloric intake which I don't like the idea
of eating an elephant at all. But then you would care more about the
impacts associated with getting a certain amount of calories out of it. And so, that's similar to
what we are trying to do here it is a difficult challenge and so
we'll dive into the details of it. Now in recent decades, international progress has been
made on LCIA, method quality. The first approaches did more basic
things like, group emissions and add emissions just based on
where they were emitted to. So, if I have one chemical
emitted to water and another chemical emitted to water. I can just group those because they're
both admitted to water independent of the ultimate impact they have,
that's called critical volumes. And there was another method
that what it did is it looked at environmental policy would define,
a critical flow of emissions. Like we're having a lot of this
pollutant emitted into the air or water, which isn't good. And then for a given scenario would
see how much extra was being emitted associated with that scenario. Is it close already to its critical flow? And so
the closer it is to its critical flow, the more impact it was considered
to have that's called ecopoints. But neither of these methods linked
to the ultimate fate exposure and impact of the actual emission. And so it turns out Leiden University in
the Netherlands played a significant role, in structuring the field in
terms of impact categories. Looking at fate exposure and impact and, I was lucky enough randomly to be
going to school at Leiden University. And meet some of the people
including Professor Hye Yoons, who helped come up with these methods. So one of the key aspects of LCIA is to
start with what we're trying to protect. We want to evaluate damage
to the things that we value. So things we want to protect our the human
system, the natural environment and of course life support
systems like our climate. And there are two different types of
values that can be considered here. There's the intrinsic value of we just
don't want people to get sick or die for human health. And we don't want species to go extinct,
for ecosystem quality. And there's also the instrumental value,
so the socioeconomic value. So do impacts, decrease the value
of our built infrastructure, or decrease the value of cash crops. Or in terms of natural resources, do our impacts decrease the amount
of minimal resources available. Or, the services that can be
provided by those ecosystems. Now of course there's also cultural value, such as valuing the cultural heritage
of historic buildings or monuments. Or value of the natural heritage or
flora, fauna and geology. And at the moment LCIA hasn't
really delved into that realm, but I hope that it does soon. And so the way that we look at
the damage to these areas of protection, is described somewhat in ISO 14044. Which describes an impact
category that we can use an LCIA. Which means we take our life
cycle inventory results, and we assign these results to
different impact categories. And we use impact modeling to compare the
midpoint damage, at different categories. We can then use damage modeling or
qualitative approaches, to compare this midpoint damage. To ultimately a damage to one
of our areas of protection. That's the overview, so
let's dive a little bit deeper into that. The UNEP-SETAC framework, describes
this midpoint and damage, framework. So we have our emissions to air water or
soil and resource extractions, and these can each be linked to
different midpoint impact categories. So for example emission of CFCs,
can be linked both to ozone depletion and to climate change because
it's a greenhouse gas. These midpoint impacts can then be
grouped together to look at their damage, their endpoint damage. For example to human health,
ecosystem quality, natural resources. And again, a given midpoint impact it's
okay for it to be added up together, to connect to different damage categories. So ozone depletion and climate
change can affect human health, but climate change can also
affect ecosystem quality. Now in this framework, it is allowed to then combine the damage
categories into a single weighted score. Because people often want to
compare an array of scenarios. And they just want to get a final
score for each scenario and see which one looks best. But that does get a little
bit like are UFM example, where you're then adding things
that don't have similar units. And have to apply your own weighting and
your own biases of what you value most. And so, we usually wouldn't take it to
the next level of a weighted score.