If you do comparative assertion, you will have to have
a peer-review work and this peer-review
will ensure that the interpretation
reflect the identified, limitation and goal of the
study that you don't suddenly have conclusion which were not really well grounding the study, and that the study report is
transparent and consistent. It's optional. But as I say, to be ISO-compatible, if you involve a
comparative assertion, you need to have a peer-review, and a peer review in fact, with three reviewers,
at least a president, a chair, and then two other reviewers which would
provide their advice. It needs to be planned and budgeted from the
start for a small LCA, that would be perhaps 10% of
the cost for a larger LCA. About 5% of the cost. What is small and large? I mean, a small LCA would be something in the range 5-10,000. Large LCA would be rather
in the range 20-30,000, but I've carried out some LCA, one LCA, for $600,000
because we were doing a product in
every state in the US. With a high level of complexity govern all
different impacts. When you involve the reviewer, involve them from the start. Discussed already, the
scope and goal definition, discuss the basis for
comparison with them, discuss after the inventory or also get from them what they suggest to use
as data sources. Because if you just involve
them at the end of your LCA, you will be in
trouble because you don't have time to correct, your budget is gone, you cannot take advantage
of their advice properly. Really, peer-review are
usually very knowledgeable and I've been doing one of my
first large peer review I did. In fact, the three
peer reviewer had probably about 40 years
of LCA experience, whereas the people
doing the LCA had only three or four years
experience cumulatively. There we really brought a lot of information
and knowledge to the LCA so that in fact the
final results were good. But it would not have been without the peer
review at the same level. These people now in fact, I've learned a lot and now themselves experts
since that time, which was very
interesting and we were working on a regular
basis with them in fact. Peer review, the importance
to have that clearly stated from the star.t
The scope definition, the scope of an LCA must take
into account and clearly describe a bit all
the steps of the LCA. But in particular here four steps which are part
of the goal definition. Product system to be studied; function of the system, functional unit
system boundaries. A series of points
which are more on the inventory side like the allocation procedure will
define all what it means. Data requirement,
assumption, value choices, limitatation data
quality requirements. Typical of critical review and the type and format of the
report which is there. Then it should also define the life cycle impact
assessment methods and interpretation to
be used in that case. Just to be clear, in
the golden scope, you don't do all that. But I will say up a posteriori. Once you've done that, you define exactly what is
going to come in the study and how it will be made or has been made in some respect if you
define that a posteriori. Now, how do you
perform your LCA? How do you best invest
the time you have, you have a limited
amount of money. It limits the time you can
invest if the consultant, you need to bill at
least $1,000 a day for younger scientists,
or young analyst. If you have a 5,000 LCA, you have basically 10 days. How to best involve
these ten days. I recommend to
carry out the LCA, this is not an eyesore itself, but in two steps. That's valid for many
scientific approach with about equal
effort in each step. First step you do a
first screening phase, and that will last until
halfway of your LCA. If you have 10 days
after five days, you come back to your sponsor with the first screening
phase covering the whole LCA and
assessing orders of magnitude of the
emission inventory and impacts. Or if your LCA was 30 days work, or $30,000 typically, after 15 days work, you will come and present the first screening
of all the study. Then you identify
with your sponsor and use your advisory group. What to do in priority in a default detailed analysis
to then invest your time in the most important
life-cycle stages or most important components
of your products, or the most important
substances impact that you have so that you don't give equal importance
to every stage, but you really emphasize and get the maximum benefit and accuracy and improvements
in your study with the time that is left
to invest for this. In summary, the goal and scope definition phase is crucial and it defines the
main hypothesis and method used in the LCA. It's really crucial step to ensure the steady consistency. It requires discussion and interaction between the
clients, the sponsor, the analysts
performing the study, the potential stakeholders, and potentially if any of the
independent peer reviewer.