How do we handle when
a process is producing simultaneously different core-products. How to separate and attribute part
of the emission to one product and the other part to the second one,
that's what we are going to see. And our objective is how to handle
core-product in life cycle assessment. And we will identify suited
allocation method to the problem and rules for
good versus inappropriate practice. So let's look at the allocation
between two products and let's take an example to decide
how to separate two products. So let's take a wheat crop. And this wheat crop, you have different
operations like the plowing and harvesting and all this operation and at the end you have your wheat
that you were intending to obtain. But in addition you also have some
straw that you have produced. And the question is the raw
material extraction for the detail of the tractor for example or
the emission from that same tractor, how to separate them and allocated partly
to the straw and partly to the wheat, because in general we are interested in
the wheat for example for bread making. So to do that,
we need an allocation procedure and keyword here is causality. We only will accept to do it if there
is a causality relationship and we will use method based on causality. Let's look at what 14 or 44 is proposing as a preference order,
okay? So the allocation method
can be applied and each of these allocation only
if they fulfill the respective condition of use and
have this causality principle and this should be done in
the following order of preference. First we propose to do process separation. If it is possible to disassociate
the different production system. So let's take our straw and our wheat. So the straw here and
the wheat product A, okay? And let's think of plowing our field,
okay? Does plowing belong to wheat or to straw? We cannot separate that
we need the plowing, we need the sowing of the wheat and
this will both produce wheat and straw. So this approach is not
applicable in this situation but it could be partly apply
when we think that for the straw bales and
the baling here of my straw. This really only belong to B. So from the point of harvest
everything which is downstream from that should be attributed
either to the straw or to the wheat, but
not to both of them in that case, okay? But not really possible to
apply fully in that case. The second method to apply in
order of preference is what is called system expansion. The idea is to say,
my core product B, okay, is in fact substituting another product in
the economy that we don't need to produce. Let's call it product product B prime,
which has a similar function but not necessarily exactly the same or
not the same way to produce. Let's take an example,
if you're in Denmark and you produce straw,
straw is often used for producing heat. And if you produce heat here, okay, you may be substituting heat
production from natural gas. Okay, so now the idea is to say
we can subtract to process A and B, the emission associated
with the heat of natural gas that we haven't avoided burden
sort of bonus for that. And so we will say that the emission of product A equal to the emission of product (A + B)- the emission of product B prime, okay? And that's away which is
relatively rigorous but and there is a bad this is only valid
if B is indeed substituting B prime. So if the substituted core product
is fully defined known and it really happens okay,
but if it's the case, this is this is really a good procedure. The third possibility is to
do physical allocation and for example, on the basis of mass or
energy content, but this is only valid if there is
a causality between the mass and the amount of each of these
products of the emission associated with each
of these two products. So if we take the case of the wheat and
the straw, we could think that if you feed both
the wheat and the straw to a cow and that can happen in in in in
some cases not very common, but it happens okay,
you could take X as typically the nutritional content
of the of the feet, Okay. Or the the energy in the feet and allocate proportionally to the energy
produced via the wheat and the energy produce and
fed to the cow via the stroke. But now if wheat is used for bread making,
we are not eating the stroke. So we cannot use the energy content
as a basis for allocating this. So in that case we we were not
going to use this approach and we jump on the fourth approach
which is generally nearly always applicable is a financial and
economic allocation. Okay.
And here the economic allocation is a measure of the incentive for producing. And so we will assess the value of process
a product A the value of product B. And we reallocate
proportionally to these values. two points linked to that some people
will argue, But prices fluctuating. So how how can we have a reliable
method If if price can fluctuate, I would say this is really realistic
because when you look at people and the producer will adapt
their production and what they are doing
according to the price. If I take the example,
presently the price of straw is about 1% okay of
the price of the wheat Which represent 9 99% of the overall value. But if the price of straw
would become 10 times higher, I'm sure that the the producer
will change the variety. For example of the wheat he is
producing to get longer stro or to produce maestro versus the wheat. And presently the contrary as
the value of straw is low producer and farmer will use growth regulator
to limit the height of the weed so that the we'd stay and doesn't break and
the windy condition so that when the harvest comes
the wheat is still standing and we don't lose part of the yield
because the stem have been broken and the yield cannot the grain
cannot be harvested. Okay so this varying price would
correspond also to varying practices. So I think we we we reflect
well the incentive for production last choice which is not
really a good one is value choices or arbitrary parameter which lead
also to arbitrary results in that case does allocation matters. It does matter. Let's take our example of wheat and
stroke. If we use the straw for heating and apply the system expansion
a pros we see that for a total of about 27,000 mega jewel, okay. For the total of the of
the crop which is the sum of these two flow here we
will have 93% attributed to the straw because
the straw is able to produce 25,690 mega jewel of
heat which substitutes an equivalent amount from the natural gas. But look if we now Say
it was not just heating, it was a co generation of heat and
power which is I think often the case then even we will
produce more than the production. So we will attribute 126% of
the energy to the stroke. Because my wheat crop
becomes productive of energy, it's not consuming, it's producing
more and we get the bun use for the wheat because we have
produced more energy and we have minus 20% of energy
associated with that. On the other hand when So
here these two cases it's very small amount of energy which is allocated to
the straw and the same for the C02. You see only 17% and 4%. Now look what you do if you rain,
cooperate you throw in the soil and replace some basically
first fade fertilizer. In that case it's only a a small bonus,
a small compensation of substitution and you allocate only 1.5% to the stroke and
you get 98% to the wheat. So really inverse results compared
to the stroke for heating for example and the financial
allocation as we saw is 99% for the wheat and 1% for the stroke. So radically different results
according to the method and so that's why these hierarchy
of approaches is important. But again we can only apply
the system expansion if we know the substituted product and
it really happens. So in summary for allocation allocation
can play a substantial role and bias results if not appropriate. One of the mostly common bias is to apply
mass of physical allocation without underlying causality relationship,
which is not good practice. In such cases,
even an economic allocation is more appropriate as representative
of economic causality and incentive for producing each core product.