So let's take an example how
this uncertainty can be applied, and let's of course take our
hands drying case study. We'll consider here functional unit
of 260,000 pairs of hands dried. And this study was in fact
commissioned by the XLERATOR Dryer company which wanted to compare
their 10 seconds at the same power of about 1800 watt drying
compared to a Conventional Dryer which takes 30 seconds, and
paper towel as a third alternative. And we look here 0% recycled paper, and 100% recycled paper as alternative. And this study was done
in collaboration with my colleague John Diddling from Quantis, a consulting company for XLERATOR. What is the results for
these 250,000 hands dried? We see clearly the XLERATOR here, okay, has substantially lower
impact than the other, and it's about a third of the impact
here compared to the standard dryer because you are here 10 seconds
drying against the 30 seconds. So you have you have a direct
gain which is straight forward. The standard dryer is about
equivalent to the recycled paper, which is slightly different
as we see here to the basic paper with 0% recycled
content in that case. So, little gain in recycling,
that's one thing. And we know that these
two are very similar. So the comparison between these two
will be much more robust than when we compare two very different cases here. Like the paper, we see the use stage
was dominating the electricity for the air dryer,
whereas the manufacturing of my towel and the raw material were
the important part for the material production plus the disposal
that we have at the end of life, okay? So the question now, let's perform
an uncertainty assessment and identify which of these
differences are significant. For example, here's the difference between
this 100% here and 0% significant. Or is the difference here
between my hairdryer and my conventional paper towel significant,
okay? Or is this different here sufficient here? So according to my rule,
we probably at the limit to be, I mean, significance, because we are around 10%
bar 15% here differences on the CO2. So we might be borderline. That's where it's interesting
to go a bit further and apply this tailored series
expansion that we have. So how do we proceed? First you have to determine the
uncertainty on the input parameters for each unit's process, both for
the elementary and the intermediary flows. Then you can use this uncertainty
on the input parameter to calculate the uncertainty distribution and parameterize this distribution for
your output variable. For example, your windows gas
score per functional unit or 260,000 hands dried. And then you can analyze
the significance of the ratio or difference between scenario,
and I'll come back on that, because scenario can vary in parallel and
not always independent. So you need to not just compare
each scenario for itself, but look at the scenario 2 by 2,
the ratio or difference in final score. Let's apply that to our case. First, which type of distribution
are we using in LCA? Very often log normal distribution, why? Because we are limited usually for most of our data at 0,
we are bounded at 0. Why we are there,
because you cannot have negative emission, or you cannot have consumption
of a resource which is negative. So when you have data which is limited on
the lower side but not on the upper side, often you will have a distribution
like a log normal distribution which has a longer tail on the upper part
because here you have no limitation. So the uncertainty is higher on that side. How is a log normal
distribution parameterized? We start from here. The geo means the mean of the log,
which is not the top by the way of the distribution,
it's a bit on the right of the top. And this mean of the log we will
consider what we call the GSD square or the square geometric standard deviation, also called sometime in certain cases,
the coefficient of variation. And this is a multiplicative parameters,
okay? So the 95th confidence interval will
be between an upper and a lower limit. And you see that the upper limit
is bigger than the lower limit. And if I have a GSD square of 2,
this means that the lower limit will be equal to the geo
mean divided by 2 and the upper. So I will have here 280 divided by 2, that's about 140, okay? And on the upper side, I will have in fact around here 500 that will be twice the GSD square, okay? And that would be in fact more than
500 in term of the distribution. So we should have in fact
to be really equal the same area here, 2.5% of the points here, and 2.5% should be down on this side. So this really a way to define my
distribution would be the geo-mean, which corresponds often to the best estimate
plus this GSD square which is defined. What are the typical
value of this GSD square? This is given in ecoinvent by
the basic uncertainty, and this depends on the type of flow. If I look first at intermediary flows,
okay, and we say energy semi-finished product amount
of material, small uncertainty, 1.05. So divided by 1.05 of multiplied by 105,
that's about 5%, okay? And because it's well defined. Transportation services or infrastructure
are higher with the factor 2 or 3, multiplied by 3, or
divided by 3 in that case. What about the elementary flow? And first the resources, we know pretty
well how much energy we're using. How much metal we have for
a piece of front end panel for example. Again, about 5% uncertainty here,
whereas for the lane use, it's higher uncertainty,
factor 1.5 or 2 here. Pollutant emitted to air,
we can see that for CO2, this is relatively accurate, also the 5%. But when we move to it's a factor 1.5. And if you go to VOC here, factor 2
to 3 on the fine particulate matter, but certain substances you go
up to a factor 5 uncertainty. And for example, heavy metal for
combustion is really high. Same story with water with high
uncertainty under heavy metal, and the total organic content of things that
are more accurate with the factor 1.5. Agriculture emission are better known for water emission,
which are better defined here. From this basic uncertainty, you then add some additional factor as
a function of the quality of the data. And the idea is to use
a semi-quantitative here approach. And it's called the pedigree
approach where for each data, okay, for example, my emission of CO2 at my power plant,
okay, you look,
is the data highly reliable or not? And you give it a score of 1 to 5. So I would say by data reliability,
this is good. Do I have several samples here
that a completeness covering all the different case, no. So that could be a 4 out
of 5 representativeness. Is it representative of my technology,
that could be perhaps a three geographic. Is it from the same region? Yes, perhaps. And it's all these data reason,
not necessarily. So you will have a three, and technological creation
is the same technology. Know in that case that would be a 5. And based on the value here,
you have a method in ecoinvent. And you can have a look in the chapter
of the book looking at that which will define additional
factor to combine with this basic uncertainity of typically
a factor 1 if I have 1, 1, 1,1, 1, okay, in all this number. Or up to a factor 2 if this is more a 5,
5, 5, 5, 5, okay, in that case. This we do it for
each of the input of my parameter. And the beauty is that
ecoinvent has done that for us, has defined a default uncertainty
that you can find semi-pro. But the version you're using for your case
study cannot run the uncertainty measure, but the PhD version or
the expert version can.