Interpretation, the
force phase of LCA. What are the basic principles
for interpretation? It's looking at your
product results from all the different points
of view that you can do, from an angle, from
another angle, and this will build your
conclusion of your study. We're really focusing on
the interpretation phase, the last phase of my life cycle. We know that interpretation
has already taken place as we were analyzing
the goal definition, as we analyze the inventory. But it's really at the end of the impact
assessment that we really have most of the
in-depth interpretation. We will look at these
different angles. Learning objective
evaluate results. We want to draw conclusion, explain the limitation
of the study, and make recommendation based on the results of our inventory and impact
assessment phases. Within that, we want to
identify the critical points, the critical stages, the critical component in our life cycle where most
of the impact occur. Of course, we want to be
sure that our results hold, and we want to also
look at the quality and robustness of results with different tool quality control, sensitivity analysis, uncertainty analysis
that we can do. Look from different angles. You have the picture here
from the alleged glace in Glacier in Switzerland, the largest nation in Europe. It's fascinating when you want
to walk along the glacier. This is a picture when
you are at the bottom, like here along the bottom. But you can walk about ten miles along here, it's just gorgeous. Every 200 feet or
400 feet you stop, you look and it's different
and you want to take picture. Because you've, you've
changed the angle and you discover
something new every time. As this glacier is
really turning round, the angle is changing. LCA interpretation is like that. You want you want to look at
these different angle and your results will look
slightly different and you will learn something new from each of these angles. Which angles should we
look the results from? We should look at
each LCA phase. After the pollutant inventory,
the characterization, the damage that we want
to look at the results. Then we want to look at the
results after each LCA stage. Raw material extraction, what is the contribution
of manufacturing, transportation, use
phase disposal. We will come back on concentrating of the
largest of course, but also the one where you have the highest reduction potential in terms of these stages each. If you have a multi-component
product like a computer, you can look how
much at the screen, at the keyboard,
at the hard-disk, the motherboard, you
main control unit. Each of these
component contributes, and that will guide
you also where to intervene in priority. You can look also
at each process. That would be each
intermediary flow, which is important
and contributing, or each pollutant, which is each elementary flow which
play an important role. Again, we could look for each
midpoint impact category. How much is your given
midpoint contributing. Finally, you can look
at the contribution of the mid-point impact category to the damage on human health, or damage to the ecosystem. Is it due mostly to acidification
versus ecotoxicity, for example, or impact of
global ring on ecosystem? You want to put that
in perspective. Here are a few questions you can checklist you can ask when you look at results which are the largest contribution to
the environmental impact. This is clear. We
want, to do that. We have just to be
careful when we use that, because it depends how refined you've been in differentiating
your processes. Sometimes a large set of individual processes
that each of them looks small that leads to substantial impact when summed
up and brought together. Okay, But still, what matters
is the first question. Second is, what can we change, and what is either
cheap economy, or even cost-effective
to change? It depends not only on
what is the large but on the feasibility of
changing something. Typically we look here
for win-win cases where both impact and costs can be
reduced at the same time. It makes perfect
sense to do that. We look for part
of the life-cycle, or part of the product where limited low-cost
intervention can be very efficient
in reusing impact, even if it's only two
percent of the total. Take the doors of the house. We have two or three
doors inside the house, and in term of impact, it's only perhaps two
to three percent of the impact of the heat
losses through this door. But often these door of
poor quality, you could easily put the more insulated
door which would be substantial improvement
per square feet change in that case, or per dollar invested. Then we want to test
the robustness, the significance of the reasons. The question is, why? Why? Why? Are the difference
between my scenarios significant, or
environmentally relevant? These differ between
impact categories. Because if you look at global warming is probably a ten percent difference will be substantial or
significant whereas for toxicity you want
at least one order of magnitude but the variation
between the least and most toxic substances is six or seven
orders of magnitude. Then you want, once you have
established your conclusion, you want to check if it's
correct and rubbish. You can use several
impact assessment method, for example, to check,
check, and check. When there are
differences in term, you want to know the
cause of the differences. That's exactly the
question is why? In term of which process is more important or more polluting
in one than the other, which inventory flow
is contributing. You can perform
sensitivity study what to look at what are the
key parameter and which are affecting
and for which the environmental results are basically proportional
to these parameter. In all that, if
results are surprising or not what you expected or you have differences and you
don't really understand, you want to be sure
you understand the underlying
parameter component of stage responsible for these
differences are surprised. The message is valid for
any scientific study. Never let it go
until you understand the rationale for a difference
or surprising results. Because either you've
made a mistake two-thirds of the time
or the last third, you learn something new and
you experience broaden, and in addition, it's fun. Summary, interpretation is about ensuring a maximum useful
output from your study. You've worked hard
for your case study and saying that you
don't want to be half interpreted because you
have built like in CMA Pro, your inventory and your
impact assessment, get the maximum amount
of it and test it. You can use the question we just mentioned as a checklist to really provide the maximum useful to you and your sponsor. You then test the robustness
and the correctness of the main conclusion of a valid whatever back-end
system metadata I choose. Of course, we also
identify what we have not covered all the
needs or the limitation, and that will set the
background for future study. Often, the future need
is an elegant way to assess limitation or to communicate limitation
in that case.