Let us look together at guidelines for
performing the Phase 2 of your case study leading to the final
presentation and using SimaPro software for calculating your impact assessment
and interpretation. The learning objective
here is for Phase 2, to use the SimaPro
software focusing on impact assessment and
interpretation of your results. In addition to your
presentation and accounting for the command received after
your final presentation, you want to write a two-pages concise and rich abstract
with main results. Here I would like to provide you an overview of the
different instructions, template, example, deliverables, and evaluation criteria
for case study. Phase 2. We focus on Phase 2 as the use of the SimaPro
software leading to final presentation
and to a summary of two pages which summarize your
main methods and results. What are the
objectives of Phase 2? Compare and interpret the comprehensive
environmental impacts, this time not just
CO_2 energy balance, but acidification,
eutrophication, all the different impact of your product alternatives
using an LCA software, and you can also perform
some sensitivity study here. You want to collect the data for the selected variables from
Phase 1 to improve what you had done in screening
and you want to provide recommendation
for product improvements. What are the steps and
deliverable of Phase 2? After a first run and implementing results
in new software, we'll take a first process T for CO_2 energy and GA1 results and compare it with the
energy and CO_2 from GA1 results from your
previous hand calculation. We want to compare software results with
hand calculation. This is your group
activity 2a deliverable. You then perform the inventory
and impact assessment, accounting for the commands
that we will make after that you have presented here
your first process tree, and that will lead
for the slides for your final case
study presentation posted on the day before
your presentation for it. The final slide will include correction from the
oral presentation that you will have received. In GA4, you have these final two-pages projects abstract including two figures. Let's go a bit more in
detail what it looks like. For group activity 2a, the process tree and
inventory, basically, you implement your scenario in SimaPro following the guidelines and the experience we got with hands trying
example together, performing it together
this time on your own you will do it and implement
your scenario. Be careful to really
design your process, not everything per
functional units all the time and have one
assembly with everything. You want to create
components like we created for the towel in the
hands drying example, we create one towel which include the transport
of that towel, the paper used for that towel, and even the disposal
for that towel. Then in the assembly
you will say, I'm using 1.5 towel
per functional unit. The interest of that is if you can easily perform a
sensitivity study, if I'm using one or two
towel or three towels, what are the changes, and you can very easily run
this scenario in that way. You can also verify things in an easy way if you do
it per components. We want here now to display the fossil CO_2 and the
non-renewable primary energy. Take it from impact 2002,
for example, Tracy, you cannot really
compare with the CO_2 with its surplus energy, which doesn't account for
the main energy consumption, so you take it in Impact 2002 and you perform the
network and process tree, and you compare your
process tree with your hand and excel calculation
that you made earlier, explain any
substantial difference more than, for example, 30 percent because that's probably is why you
have a problem. We have posted here
a template which enable you to make that and
post your different points. This is a good example with the wall paint compared
to a wallpaper. Here for the wall paint,
for each scenario, you want to look at
the process tree, identifying the main
contributors here that we have and you compare
then the amount of CO_2 you have here with the
amount you had calculated by hand calculation
and you should be relatively close
normally within 10, 20, maximum 30 percent, but if 30 percent, you
start to need to explain. By the way, you
could still detail in SimaPro that you have about 61 percent
for the Ti0_2 here, the titanium dioxide here
20.5 percent and AU steel, which is the last five
percent that you have here. Do that for each
of the scenario. Then that will constitute
your first GA2a deliverable. In GA2b, you want
then to present your normalized damage
per impact category. Click on the top here you
have a small box to call, which is per impact category that you can click to get not a total human
health impacts, but the different impacts for all the human health category if you take here
for impact 2002, and all the ecosystem
quality category, the global warming and the energy category
that you have here. You can also perform in there a sensitivity study looking here at an alternative
wallpaper and an alternative wall
paint that we have here and looking what
are the improvement if I have a product improvement
and you see here you have a 30 percent
product improvement. The beauty of keeping that
bearing per category is, for example, you see
ionizing radiation behaves slightly
differently from the other. Some of the results are inverse but we see here that this is
not really relevant here, what is really relevant is
fine particulate matter, a bit the carcinogen and
basically global warming and non-renewable energy are
re-dominant in this case. Evaluation criteria for
your final presentation, we will look at the
quality of check between your SimaPro inventory and
your hand calculation. The originality and the interest of impact assessment results, the appropriate analysis and depths of results
interpretation, and the quality of
your conclusion and especially recommendation
to the user that what you've done
is directly useful. We value the amount
of work you make and the originality if
you take self-initiative, not just what we told you
to do or classical case, but explore a bit,
try new things. This is how we learn and we arrive to
interesting results. We look at the quality of your presentation and ability to answer question to arrive
to an overall rate. The grade themselves will
be put at the end of GA3b. Once you have resubmitted your presentation with
the corrected slides, then we will
evaluate that in one go the other intermediate
representations so that you get feedback as we progress
and you can correct yourself and arrive to a really
good final presentation. Then after the presentation, accounting also for the
comments you have received, you write a two-page summary and we will provide you a
template for that which is in fact coming
from the template to propose abstract for the
C Tech Europe Conference, which is a nice, instead
of just being 400 words, it's two pages
template where you can define your introduction
and goal definition, method data inventory here. Don't tell so much what you
did but how you did it. Say, we used this and
this two to obtain this, or we applied this
model to do that, not just that we did that. We want to understand
well how you did it. Then for the results on impact assessment and
discussion interpretation, we want here all main result. Again, don't say we
obtained CO_2 balance. You give the results
of your CO_2 balance, the results of your network. For that, we want you
to paste two figures and have some legends and
labeled clearly displayed. X axis must have
units and clearly indicated on these two figures and choose the one
which are risks, which summarizes, in a sense, all UK studying in
a compact way but informative way and
be result-oriented. Present what is original, what you bring you. Here, finally, have also short recommendation
of what you say plus a few references with your main sources that you use. Evaluation criteria for
the final abstract. The method is clearly
and shortly summarized, including the main data sources. Results are correct. We want no mistake, especially because
you got feedback so you should be good now, well-described and a good
interpretation of figures. It's not just putting a figure. You need to get out the
information or the figure, interpret what are
the main influence, what is interesting
in this figure, in a few bullet points
that you can have. We value the adequate choices
of the two main figure, that they are really the best
results and that you have useful recommendation with future work and
short limitation. Again, amount of work, originality and
self-initiative and the quality of the writing. We want it concise and
rich informative test in a professional layout. Finally, we'll arrive
to an overall rating. To help you to perform all this, we have a few complimentary
file for GA2a. The process tree, you have a process
tree template file. We provide you an example of the final presentation on this
wallpaper and wall paint, which was well-designed
project here. You have two pages abstract template which is empty
and you can fill it in, and you have an abstract
example, again, which was from an
interesting project that you can look at.